Internet Archive










Transcriber Notes

Text emphasis displayed as _Italics_.




HINTS ON MOUNTAIN-LION TRAPPING


[Illustration: LEAFLET NO. 94]

Issued April, 1933




HINTS ON MOUNTAIN-LION TRAPPING

By Stanley P. Young, _Principal Biologist, in Charge, Division
of Predatory Animal and Rodent Control, Bureau of Biological Survey_



THE AMERICAN MOUNTAIN-LION (_Felis concolor_) is one of the
largest predatory animals of the United States, sometimes weighing more
than 200 pounds. Game conservationists recognize it as the greatest
natural enemy of deer. Stockmen learn to their sorrow that when game
is scarce the mountain-lion attacks young domestic stock, particularly
colts, lambs, and kids, and even full-grown horses and cattle. In some
western areas it is practically impossible to raise young colts or sheep
on open stock ranges in the rough, rocky, and broken country that forms
an ideal habitat for the mountain-lion.

The range of the mountain-lion, which is known also as cougar, panther,
puma, and catamount, includes at present the large wilderness areas
of the United States west of the one hundredth meridian. The heaviest
infestation is in the Rocky Mountain States and southward through the
desert mountain ranges of Arizona, Texas, and New Mexico. Farther
westward mountain-lions are much less numerous, except in the coastal
ranges of California, Oregon, and Washington, where they are somewhat
abundant.

For the protection of domestic livestock and of large game in certain
areas it is necessary to keep mountain-lions well under control. In
spite of control measures, however, these predators will probably long
continue to exist in the United States. There are many areas where
normal hunting and the vicissitudes of the wild can be depended upon
to keep their numbers within reasonable limits. There are also great
stretches of wilderness areas that probably will never be touched by any
mountain-lion-control campaigns.

This leaflet, intended to help stockmen and game protectors in local
control of mountain-lions, is based on the experience of Biological
Survey predatory-animal hunters. A similar publication (Leaflet No. 78)
discusses control measures for such smaller members of the wild-cat
family as the bobcat and the Canada lynx.


Natural Food and Feeding Habits of the Mountain Lion

Mountain lions find most of their prey near the rougher and more
inaccessible canyons, and in such places they live and breed with least
disturbance. One of the most striking things about these animals is
the distance to which they will go for food. Many have been known to
travel 25 miles or more in a night, apparently without resting for any
appreciable length of time. Because of their remarkable endurance,
hunting them takes stamina and strength. Biological Survey hunters on the
fresh track of a mountain-lion have trailed the animal for 10 consecutive
hours or longer before treeing it.

Like the bobcat, the mountain-lion relies upon its senses of smell and
sight in much of its foraging. Its smell is keener than that of the
bobcat, though less so than in either wolf or coyote. It can see its
prey for a long distance, but unquestionably it does much of its silent,
cautious stalking by the sense of smell alone, taking advantage of every
cover until within striking distance of its victim. Its sense of hearing
also is acute.

In making a kill, the mountain-lion brings its victim to the ground with
a stunning impact of its entire weight. It generally attacks at the
throat and breast.

After making a kill and taking one meal, the mountain-lion will
sometimes, though not always, bury the remainder of a carcass under
leaves, litter, or other trash, to return for a later feast. Whether it
will thus return depends to some extent upon weather conditions and on
its ability to find prey elsewhere. Its killing and feeding habits vary
in other ways also. In one instance, a lone lion attacked a herd of ewes
and killed 192 in one night. Frequently more than one mountain-lion may
feed on a single carcass. Near one cow carcass the writer once trapped
six lions, of various sizes, evidently the parents and two litters of
offspring.

The presence of a mountain-lion on a range may be indicated by its kill
of deer or other game, even though domestic stock may not have been
disturbed. If a kill is made in fall or winter, the meat may remain fresh
for many weeks.


Control Methods

Where the control of mountain-lions is essential, the principal means
employed is the use of trained hounds. Kentucky fox hounds and a cross
between the Walker hound and the bloodhound have been found most
satisfactory for trailing mountain-lions, though any good dog may tree
one. The hunter must keep up with the pack, however, for a mountain-lion
that fights at bay instead of treeing, may kill all the dogs. When it
chooses to fight, it uses teeth and claws, backed by powerful neck and
shoulder muscles, in a telling way.

The use of poisons in mountain-lion control is not recommended. Hunting
or trapping is more satisfactory, and it is unsafe to expose poisons on
ranges where hunting dogs are being used.

Under certain conditions mountain-lions can easily be caught in traps of
the sizes known as Nos. 14 and 4½. (Fig. 1.) Although some persons oppose
the use of such traps as inhumane, no better or more practical device is
yet available.


Where to Set Traps

Either of the traps recommended may be set on a known route of the
mountain-lion, preferably at a point where the route narrows. Being a
great wanderer, the animal generally has well-defined crossing points
where it passes from one watershed to another in its search for food.
Many of these are in the low saddles of divides, and at such crossings it
is not uncommon to find "scratch hills," heaped up by the mountain-lion
in covering its urine. The writer has seen as many as eight such hills
in an area 4 feet square. They are sometimes 3 to 4 inches high and 4 to
6 inches in diameter. Frequently old or fresh feces may be noticed near
them. These hills make ideal places for setting traps, but should be left
in a natural condition.

The mountain-lion is trapped as it comes through the saddle of the divide
and stops to visit a scratch hill, being attracted either by the hill
itself or by a catnip lure placed there as described at the top of page 5.

[Illustration: B4339M

Figure 1.--Trap most suitable for mountain-lions (No. 4½),
showing drag chain and double-pronged drag attached]

When the carcass of a domestic animal, deer, or other prey found in a
control area shows unmistakably that a mountain-lion did the killing, at
least three traps should be set around it, each 15 to 20 inches away.
When the carcass is found lying on its side (Fig. 2.) one trap should be
set, as later described, between the fore and hind legs, another near the
rump, and a third near the back and parallel with the loin. These traps
constitute a carcass set and require no lure other than the carcass.
Frequently it is well to set a fourth trap 6 to 8 feet away if tracks
show the exact route taken by the lion in approaching or leaving the
carcass.

_Caution._--Trappers, especially when using the No. 4½ trap, should take
every needed precaution to safeguard livestock and valuable or harmless
wild animals; and, where necessary, should post signs to warn human
beings.


Use of Lures

Traps set along a trail and near an obstruction meant to divert the
mountain-lion close to a scratch hill, are only partly successful. The
trapper may, however, take advantage of the mountain-lion's keen sense
of smell by dropping a few drops of oil of catnip in the center of the
undisturbed scratch hill, as a lure.

Why catnip is so attractive to members of the feline family is not
yet fully known. Experiments have indicated that it produces sexual
excitation and also that it has a soothing effect on the nervous system,
similar to that of opiates on man. In some of the larger circuses catnip
has been used for years in gentling animals of the cat family. The use of
catnip oil in this country to lure members of this family within trapping
distance has been remarkably effective.

[Illustration: B3463M

Figure 2.--Quarry of mountain-lion. A carcass found on its side,
as illustrated, furnishes an excellent opportunity for making a carcass
set of three or more traps, 15 to 20 inches away]

When pure catnip oil is obtainable it should be used, diluted with pure
petrolatum, in the proportion of 40 drops of the catnip oil to 2 ounces
of petrolatum. A catnip lure so placed that it will last a long time has
been experimented with by members of the Provincial Game Conservation
Board of British Columbia, and later by the writer in the United States.
Prepared as follows, it promises to increase the effectiveness of
trapping in mountain-lion control:

The petrolatum-diluted catnip oil is smeared thinly over a piece of
cotton batting about 8 inches square, and this is covered with another
piece of the same size. The catnip-oil sandwich thus made is placed on
an ordinary tin pie plate, brown in color, so that the bottom will be
inconspicuous against the bark of a tree. Two or three feet from the
ground a tree is blazed to make the sap flow, the cut being made in the
shape of the plate. The plate is spiked over this blaze, with the batting
next to the tree so that the cotton will be kept moist by the sap. To
prevent its being torn out by a bear, the plate should fit snugly into
the cut, the lower edge flush with the bark. The bottom of the plate
should be perforated with small holes made with a shingle nail, so that
the scent will escape slowly. The plate should be shaded from the sun as
much as possible.

Such scent stations should be placed on trees along creeks where
mountain-lions are known to travel, particularly near deer trails that
lead to water. They are probably best placed on trees in narrow canyons,
where the chances of successful trapping are greater because of the
narrowness of the path along which the mountain-lion must travel. The
writer has known catnip pans to be visited by mountain-lions in such
places as long as 6 months after placement, and in British Columbia the
game authorities report a lion's visit to a station 10 months old. After
the scent station is made, traps should be set, as described later, near
the base of the tree. The mountain-lion, attracted by the catnip odor in
the plate, steps into the trap when approaching the lure.

[Illustration: Figure 3.--A 2-trap "blind" set for
mountain-lions. In the saddle of a divide the traps are placed in the
trail where it narrows. A small stick or other obstruction should be put
between the traps and one at either approach, to make the lion step into
one of the traps rather than between or over them]


Setting the Traps

The hole for the trap set should be dug about 15 to 20 inches from
a carcass, a single undisturbed scratch hill, or a tree on which a
scent station has been placed, or directly in a trail where it narrows
naturally or is made to narrow by rocks, brush, or other obstructions
placed at the sides. (Fig. 3.) The hole should be only slightly larger
than the trap, and just deep enough to hold the set at a level slightly
lower than the surrounding ground, with the drag and chain buried beneath
it. The drag, which should preferably be of ½-inch wrought iron, should
be attached to one end of the chain by a figure-8 swivel and it should
end in two well-curved prongs. (Fig. 1.) Bedding the drag under the
trap, of course, requires more excavation. The drag chain should be at
least 8 feet long and attached to the base of the trap or to one of the
springs. At scratch hills it is well to place a trap on either side, the
springs at right angles to the known direction of approach. In a trail
the traps should be in line, the springs at right angles to the direction
of travel. Experiments have proved that most of the larger predators,
and particularly the mountain-lion, tend to avoid stepping directly on
any hard object in a path. Knowing this tendency, the trapper may place
a stick or a stone between the two traps and another at each approach;
these will cause the animal to break its gait and step into one of the
traps rather than over or between them. In approaching a scratch hill,
a scent station, or a carcass where sets have been made, or in passing
over a blind set in the trail, the predator is usually caught by one of
the forefeet, though it may step into a bedded trap with a hind foot. No
scent is used at carcass or blind sets. (Pp. 4, 6.)


Covering Traps

After the trap has been firmly bedded near an undisturbed scratch hill,
scent station, or carcass, or in a trail, it should be covered with
earth and the surroundings left in a condition as nearly natural as
possible. Dry horse or cow manure, finely pulverized, may be used to
cover the inside of the trap jaws. Extreme care should be taken to keep
all dirt from under the trap pan and to see that the open space there
is at least one-fourth inch deep. The trap pan should be covered by a
pad made of canvas or old descented slicker cloth, and cut to fit snugly
inside the jaws, and all should then be covered with finely pulverized
earth, leaving the immediate area looking, as nearly as possible, as it
did before the trap was buried. Finishing such a task properly and thus
leaving the ground over the trap in a perfectly natural condition so that
it blends with the surrounding area is an art that requires much practice.


Traps Accidentally Sprung

When traps are set near carcasses additional care should be undertaken to
underpin the trap pan so that it will not spring under the weight of a
magpie, buzzard, or other carnivorous bird that may be attracted to the
carcass.

In forested areas a mountain-lion hunter may find his traps sprung by
small animals, for squirrels and other rodents (and sometimes small
birds) may dig or scratch around and between the jaws of the trap. Unless
the trap pan is properly supported, these animals are unnecessarily
endangered, and in addition the trap is frequently sprung. This may be
prevented by setting the trap pan so that it will carry a weight of
several pounds.

One simple way of underpinning the trap is to place a small twig
perpendicularly from the base snugly up to the middle point of the pan.
Instead of the small twig, some hunters use a fine coiled-steel spring.
Such contrivances will permit the trap pan to carry the weight of the
smaller mammals or birds without endangering them or releasing the trap
jaws and thus spoiling a set well placed for a mountain-lion. Devices
adjusted to mountain-lion traps to prevent their being sprung by small
mammals and birds are illustrated in Figure 4. The Biological Survey pan
spring (fig. 4, D), recently developed in this bureau can be readily
attached to the No. 14 steel trap used for mountain-lions. A slightly
larger spring is required for the No. 4½ trap. A patent on this device
has been applied for, to be dedicated to public use.


Care in Details

In trapping, attention to simple details is essential. Though the
mountain-lion trapper need not be so cautious about human scent as the
trapper of wolves or coyotes, it is well, when placing a trap, for
him to stand or kneel on a setting cloth, if for no other reason than
convenience. This cloth may be about 3 feet square and made of canvas,
slicker-coat material, or the skin of a sheep or calf. It will also help
to avoid disturbing the ground about the trap set. Excavated soil can
be placed on it, and that not needed in completing the work can thus be
easily removed. In addition, at the completion of a set, the trapping
equipment can be rolled up in it and carried away. Minor trapping details
include removing rust from traps, boiling them in water to eliminate the
conspicuous fresh odors noticed when they come from the manufacturer,
carefully repairing traps with faulty springs, taking care that the trap
pan moves freely on its post, and seeing that the jaws are adjusted to
close snugly and rapidly. Without attending carefully to minor details,
no farmer or stockmen can expect success in trapping America's prince of
predators--the mountain-lion.

[Illustration: Figure 4.--Devices to prevent capturing small
animals and birds in traps set for mountain-lions or other predators:
A, Fan supported by twig (grass or a light coil spring may be used); B,
splint support; C, forked-twig support; D, Biological Survey pan spring]



                    *       *       *       *       *


                 U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1933

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
     For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C.

                              Price 5 cents


                    *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber Notes


Illustrations positioned so as to avoid splitting paragraphs. All
occurrences of "mountain lion" were changed to "mountain-lion".






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HINTS ON MOUNTAIN-LION TRAPPING ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

