Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net,
Wayne Hammond (This file was produced from images generously
made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France
(BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)









  THE OSAGE TRIBE

  TWO VERSIONS OF THE CHILD-NAMING RITE

  BY

  FRANCIS LA FLESCHE


    Forty-third Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology to
    the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, 1925-1926, Government
    Printing Office, Washington, 1928, pages 23-164.




CONTENTS

                                                                  Page

  Introduction                                                      29

  Child-naming Rituals                                              31

  Birth Names of the Puma Gens                                      31
    The First Three Sons                                            31
    The First Three Daughters                                       32
    Sky Names                                                       32

  Child-naming ritual of the Puma gens                              33
    Ḳi´-noⁿ—ceremony of Decorating the Xo´-ḳa                        33
    Ḳi´-noⁿ Wi´-gi-e                                                34
    Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi and the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge Gentes                  35
    Ṭsi Ṭa´-p̣e (Approach to the House)                             36
    The Wa-the´-the Ceremony                                        38
    Zha´-zhe Ḳi-ṭoⁿ Wi´-gi-e                                        40
    Old-age Wi´-gi-e                                                45
    Wi´-gi-e of the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Gens                                47
    Wi´-gi-e of the Bow People                                      47
    Earth Names and Wi´-gi-es                                       48
    Wi´-gi-e of the Wa´-ṭse-gi-ṭsi                                  51
    Special Instructions to the Mother                              54
    Origin Wi´-gi-e of the Tho´-xe Gens                             56

  Child-naming Ritual of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge Gens               59
    Certain Gentes Called to Take Part in the Ceremony              59
    Wa-zho´-i-ga-the (Life symbol) Wi´-gi-e                         60
    The Xo´-ḳa Ceremonially Conducted to the Child’s House          67
    A Life Symbol Sent to Each of the Officiating Gentes            68
    Gentes Recite Their Wi´-gi-es Simultaneously                    68
    The Child Is Passed from Gens to Gens to Be Blessed             71
    First Child-naming Wi´-gi-e of the 0si´-zhu Wa-noⁿ Gens         75
    The Gentile Hair Cut of Children                                87
    Hair Cut of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge Gens                        89
    Paraphrase of the wi´-gi-e of the Red Eagle gens                90
    Wi´-gi-e of the Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi and the Tho´-xe gentes      93
    Fondness of personal adornment                                  95
    Ear Perforating                                                 95

  Ḳi´-noⁿ Wi´-gi-e                                                  96

  Ṭsi Ṭa´-p̣e Wa-thoⁿ and Wi´-gi-e                                  97

  Zha´-zhe Ḳi-toⁿ Wi´-gi-e                                          97

  U´-noⁿ Wi-gi-e                                                   101

  Wa-zho´-i-ga-the Wi´-gi-e                                        103

  Zha´-zhe Ḳi-ṭoⁿ Wi´-gi-e                                         110

  Wa-zho´-i-ga-the Wi´-gi-e                                        113

  Native Names of Osage Full Bloods                                122

    Names of the Gentes and Subgentes                              122
    Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi or P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge                             124
    Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga                                             128
    Ho´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga                                             130
    Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi                                           132
    Wa-ça´-be                                                      133
    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga                                                   135
    Hoⁿ´-ga Gthe-zhe                                               136
    Hoⁿ´-ga U-thu-ha-ge                                            139
    O´-poⁿ                                                         141
    I´-ba-ṭse                                                      142
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ                                                144
    Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe                                                146
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge                                            146
    Ṭse-do´-ga Iⁿ-dse                                              152
    Ṭse Thoⁿ´-ḳa                                                   153
    Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´                                                       153
    Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga                                            155
    Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi                                            157
    Tho´-xe                                                        160




ILLUSTRATIONS


  PLATES

                                                                  Page

  1. Wa-xthi´-zhi (Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga (Puma) gens)                        30

  2. Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ (Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens)                     30

  3. Shell gorget and downy plume (Life symbols)                    44

  4. Wa-sho´-she (Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ (Eagle) gens)                   44

  5. Wa-ṭse’-moⁿ-iⁿ (Wa-ça´-be (Black Bear) gens)                   54

  6. a, War standard (Symbolizes the white swan). b,
       Ṭse´-wa-the root (Nelumbo lutea) used for food               54

  7. Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ (Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens)                       84

  8. Straps for tying captives                                      84

  9. Four Osage children                                            92

  10. Child’s hair cut of the Tho-xe and Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi
       gentes   92

  11. Men, showing hair cut of adult Osages                         92

  12. Bone ear perforators and expanders                            92


  TEXT FIGURES

  1. Diagram showing places of gentes in the lodge                  36

  2. Symbolic robe prepared for children                            54

  3. Chart of constellation Wa´-ba-ha (Ursa Major)                  74

  4. Chart of Ṭa Tha´-bthiⁿ, Three Deer (in Orion)                  74

  5. Totemic cut of the Omaha boys’ hair                            87

  6. Symbolic hair cut of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens                          89

  7. Symbolic hair cut of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens              89

  8. Hair cut of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ and the Wa-ça´-be
       (Black Bear) gentes                                          92




  THE OSAGE TRIBE: TWO VERSIONS OF THE
  CHILD-NAMING RITE

  By FRANCIS LA FLESCHE




INTRODUCTION

The two versions of the Osage Child-naming Rite recorded in this volume
were obtained with considerable difficulty, owing to the reluctance of
the people to speak of the sacred rites that were formulated by the
Ni´-ḳa Xu-be, Holy Men, of long ago. This unwillingness to speak of
the tribal rites, excepting in the prescribed ceremonial way, arose
from a sense of reverence for things sacred and from the belief that
within the rites, and in the articles dedicated to religious use, there
resides a mystic power which could punish, by supernatural means, the
persons who speak irreverently of the rites and put to profane use the
symbolic articles.

In the early part of the life of the Osage, according to tradition, the
people kept together for protection and moved about without tribal or
gentile organizations, a condition which they termed “gani´-tha,” which
may be freely translated as, without law or order.

It was in those days that a group of men fell into the habit of
gathering together, from time to time, to exchange ideas concerning the
actions of the sun, moon, and stars which they observed move within
the sky with marvelous precision, each in its own given path. They
also noticed, in the course of their observations, that the travelers
in the upper world move from one side of the sky to the other without
making any disturbances in their relative positions, and that with
these great movements four changes take place in the vegetal life of
the earth which they agreed was effected by the actions of some of the
heavenly travelers. These seasonal changes they named Be, Do-ge´, Ṭoⁿ,
and Ba´-the (Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter).

The delving into the mysteries of the universe by this group of men,
which was carried on for a long period of time, was primarily for the
purpose of finding, if possible, the place from which comes all life.

The seasonal changes upon the earth which appear to accompany the
movements of the sun and other cosmic bodies suggested to these men the
existence between sky and earth of a procreative relationship, an idea
which fixed itself firmly in their minds. It fitted their notion that
the earth was related to and influenced by all of the great bodies that
move around within the sky. However, they were not satisfied that these
celestial bodies move without the guidance of some governing power, and
they continued their search and their discussions. Then, in course of
time, there crept into the minds of these men, who became known as the
“Little Old Men,” the thought that a silent, invisible creative power
pervades the sun, moon and stars and the earth, gives to them life, and
keeps them eternally in motion and perfect order. This creative power
which to their minds was the source of life they named Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da,
Mysterious Power, and sometimes E-a´-wa-woⁿ a-ka, The Causer of Our
Being.

These ideas are given expression in that part of the child-naming
rite where the initiated members of two gentes are first called to
enter the house in which the ceremonies are to take place. One of
these gentes, the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge, Peaceful Ṭsi´-zhu, represents
the sky with its sun, moon, and stars, and the other, the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi
Wa-shta-ge, Peaceful Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, represents the earth with its waters
and dry land. The house itself then becomes a symbol of the sky which
encompasses the sun, moon, stars, and the earth. Thus the house, the
two gentes and all the others who enter it to take part in the rite
become, collectively, a symbol of the universe wherein life manifests
itself by taking on an infinite variety of bodily forms. The whole
ceremony is an expression of a longing desire that Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da who
dwells in the universe will favor the little one who is to be named
with a long life and an endless line of descendants.

The men who recorded the two versions of the Osage child-naming rite
were typical full-blood Indians, neither of them spoke the English
language, and nothing in all that they have given suggests foreign
influence. Wa-xthi´-zhi (pl. 1) was a man of an inquiring mind. He did
not hesitate to ask of his initiators the meaning of the parts of the
rituals which he did not fully understand. He learned much from his
father, who was well versed in the ancient tribal rites.

Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ (pl. 2) did not have these advantages, but he had
a retentive mind and what he committed to memory of the rites was
sufficient to him. He did not insist upon being informed as to the
meaning of the parts of the rites that were obscure to him.

I am indebted to Mr. Vince Dillon, of Fairfax, Okla., for permitting me
to use a photograph he had made of two little Osages showing symbolic
hair cut of one of them. Also to Joe Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ for the loan of a
photograph of his two daughters. Joe is the son of Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ, who
recorded the second version of the child-naming ceremony.

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 1

WA-XTHI´-ZHI (I^N-GTHO^N´-GA (PUMA) GENS)]

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 2

SHO^N´-GE-MO^N-I^N (ṬSI´-ZHU WA-SHTA-GE GENS)]




CHILD-NAMING RITUALS


To a self-respecting Osage husband and wife, the ceremonial naming of
their first three sons and their first three daughters is of the utmost
importance. The couple regard the performing of the ceremony as a
sacred duty to their children which must never be neglected.

Each of these sons and daughters must be named according to the rites
prescribed by the ancient Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga. Until the ceremonial naming
the child has no place in the gentile organization, and it is not even
regarded as a person.

Every one of these three sons and three daughters has a special kinship
term which can be used only by the father, the mother, and the nearest
relatives. These special kinship terms, as observed in their sequence,
are as follows:

  Sons                     Daughters

  Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´.                Mi´-noⁿ.
  Kshoⁿ´-ga.                Wi´-he.
  Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga.              Çi´-ge or A-çiⁿ´-ga.

All the sons born after the third one are Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga, and all the
daughters born after the third one, Çi´-ge or A-çiⁿ´-ga.

To each of the first six children belongs a distinctive gentile
personal name, spoken of as: iⁿ-gthoⁿ´ zha-zhe (Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´ name),
mi´-noⁿ zha-zhe (Mi´-noⁿ name), etc. These names must always be
ceremonially conferred upon the newly born child. All the other sons
and daughters are named without any formality because the ceremony
performed for the Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga and the Çi´-ge serves for the other
children that may follow. These distinctive gentile names may be
designated as gentile birth names.




BIRTH NAMES OF THE PUMA GENS


The gentile birth names of the Puma gens, as given by Wa-xthi´-zhi, are
as follows:


THE FIRST THREE SONS

1. Mi´-wa-ga-xe, Child-of-the-sun. This name is commemorative of the
talk that took place between the “Little Ones” and the Sun when they
went to him to ask for aid as they were about to come to the earth,
their future home. In asking for aid, the “Little Ones” addressed
the Sun as grandfather, and the Sun, in reply, said to them: “It
is true that you are my children.” Hence the name, Mi´-wa-ga-xe,
Child-of-the-sun. The name is mentioned in the Naming Ritual of the
Puma gens. (See p. 41, lines 24 to 27.)

2. I´-e-çka-wa-the, Giver-of-speech. The Sun also gave to the “Little
Ones” the power of expressing their thoughts by speech, and the skill
in arranging their words so that they can be clearly understood. When
a person speaks intelligently he is spoken of as i´-e-wa-çka, a
clear speaker. The children are given the name I´-e-çka-wa-the as a
recognition of this great gift from the Sun. The name is mentioned in
the Naming Ritual of the Puma gens. (See p. 41, line 34.)

The story of the introduction of this name, as told by the Black Bear
gens in their Ni´-ḳi Ritual, differs from the Puma version of the
story. (See p. 228, 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., lines 238 to 304.)

3. Moⁿ´-ga-xe, Arrow-maker. At the same time that the Sun gave to the
“Little Ones” the gift of speech he gave to them a finished arrow so
that when they came to dwell upon the earth they could make arrows
like it and use them for defending themselves against enemies and for
killing animals to use for food. The name is mentioned in the Puma
Naming Ritual. (See p. 42, line 44.)


THE FIRST THREE DAUGHTERS

1. Moⁿ´-ca-ṭse-xi, Sacred Arrowshaft. The name Moⁿ´-ca-ṭse-xi refers
to the ray of light which was given by the Sun to the “Little Ones”
for use as an arrowshaft. This shaft had the quality of unerring
precision which excited the wonder of the “Little Ones.” It was to them
a mysterious arrowshaft. The name is mentioned in the Naming Ritual of
the Puma gens. (See p. 41, line 29.)

2. Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-op-she-wiⁿ, Woman-who-travels-over-the-earth. This name
refers to the ever recurring westward movement of the moon over the
earth. The name is mentioned in the Naming Ritual of the Puma gens.
(See p. 41, line 39.)

3. Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi, Beloved-child-of-the-sun. This name is mentioned in
the Naming Ritual of the Puma gens. (See p. 42, line 49.)

Another name follows that of the third son in the ritual,
Iⁿ-shta´-sha-be, Dark-eyes, and is a Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga name. The name is
mentioned in the Naming Ritual of the Puma gens. (See p. 42, line 54.)

The name E-noⁿ´-gi-tha-bi, The Favorite, follows that of the third
daughter, and is a Çi´-ge name. This name is not mentioned in the
ritual. Wa-xthi´-zhi said the fourth daughter is the favored one
because if the first three should fail to bring forth children the
parents would cherish the hope that their fourth daughter will give
them grandchildren.


SKY NAMES

The distinctive birth names of the Puma gens, mentioned above, are
spoken of as sky names, to distinguish them from the common gentile
names. These birth names are said to have originated in the sky when
the “Little Ones” were about to descend to the earth to take upon
themselves bodily form. Some of these names refer to important events
that came to pass before the descent from the sky to the earth. Earth
names were also used by both the Puma and the Black Bear gentes. These
names will be referred to later.

Every Osage gens has its own version of the tribal Child-naming Ritual.
The versions belonging to the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga (Puma) gens of the Hoⁿ´-ga
great division and that belonging to the Ṭsi´-zhu great division have
been secured and are given below in detail.




CHILD-NAMING RITUAL OF THE PUMA GENS

(WA-XTHI´-ZHI)


When a man of the Puma gens is prepared for the ceremonial naming of
his newly born son he sends for the Sho´-ḳa (official messenger) of
his gens. On the arrival of the Sho´-ḳa the father puts before him
his customary fee of a blanket or blue cloth and a little pipe which
he must carry as his official badge. The father of the child then
orders the Sho´-ḳa to go and call the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of the Puma,
the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge, and the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Wa-shta-ge gentes. The
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge is the Peace gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu great tribal
division, and the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Wa-shta-ge the Peace gens of the Hoⁿ´-ga
great tribal division. Prominence was given, in this ceremony, to these
two gentes because they are the favored people of the sun and the
unclouded sky, the most sacred of the cosmic forces. Through these two
favored gentes the blessings of peace and long life are invoked for the
child to be named and formally given its place in the tribal unit.

The Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of these three gentes assemble in the evening at
the house of the father who, in a formal speech, makes known to them
the purpose of the summons. Then the heads of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
and the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Wa-shta-ge gentes direct the Sho´-ḳa to go and call
the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of the following gentes to assemble at the house
of the father on the next morning:

Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ, Wa-ça´-be-ṭoⁿ and the O´-poⁿ, of the Hoⁿ´-ga
subdivision; Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Wa-shta-ge, Ho´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga, Wa-zha´-zhe
Çka and the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga of the Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision; Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-shta-ge, Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ, Mi-k’iⁿ´ Wa-noⁿ and the Tho´-xe of the
Ṭsi´-zhu great division.

The Sho´-ḳa, as he goes on this errand, does not neglect the little
pipe, his official badge.


ḲI´-NOⁿ—CEREMONY OF DECORATING THE XO´-ḲA

Before sunrise of the following day the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of the Puma
gens assemble at the house of the member who had been appointed by the
father to act as Xo´-ḳa in the ceremony. When all the members had taken
their places the A´-ḳi-hoⁿ Xo´-ḳa (master of ceremonies) recites the
wi´-gi-e relating to the symbolic articles with which the Xo´-ḳa is to
be decorated. The wi´-gi-e is accompanied by certain ceremonial acts
performed by an assistant. The first section of the wi´-gi-e relates
to the red dawn, the beginning of the life of day. The assistant, who
has put red paint on the palms of his hands, spreads them out toward
the dawn that is reddening the eastern sky. When the A´-ḳi-hoⁿ Xo´-ḳa
reaches the fourth line the assistant paints red the face of the
Xo´-ḳa. Then, as the A´-ḳi-hoⁿ Xo´-ḳa goes on to the second section
the assistant takes up a white, downy feather (pl. 3, _b_), taken from
the under covert of an eagle’s tail, and holds it poised over the
Xo´-ḳa’s head. When the twelfth line of the wi´-gi-e is reached the
assistant quickly fastens the feather to the scalplock of the Xo´-ḳa.
This feather symbolizes one of the two white shafts of light that may
be seen at either side of the sun as it rises through the fading color
of the dawn. Each of these two shafts symbolizes a never-ending life.
The one at the right belongs to the Hoⁿ´-ga great division and the
one at the left to the Ṭsi´-zhu great division. At the beginning of
the third section of the wi´-gi-e the assistant rubs in the palms of
his hands a bit of buffalo fat, then holds his outspread hands poised
over the Xo´-ḳa’s head. When the twentieth line is reached he anoints
the Xo´-ḳa’s hair with the oil, an act by which is expressed the wish
that the child whom the Xo´-ḳa represents shall always be abundantly
supplied with food of all kinds.

At the fourth section of the wi´-gi-e the assistant takes up a necklace
of beads, or a narrow woven band, to which is attached a shell gorget
(pl. 3, _a_) and holds it in readiness. When the twenty-sixth line is
reached he puts the necklace upon the neck of the Xo´-ḳa so that the
gorget hangs upon his breast. This gorget typifies the Sun, whose life
endures forever.


ḲI´-NO^N WI´-GI-E

(FREE TRANSLATION)

1

    1. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    2. The people spake to one another, saying: With what shall the
         little ones decorate their faces, as they travel the path of
         life?
    3. With the symbol of the god who never fails to appear at the
         beginning of day,
    4. The little ones shall decorate their faces, as they travel the
         path of life.
    5. When they decorate their faces with this symbol,
    6. They shall be difficult to overcome by death, as they travel
         the path of life, O, younger brothers.

2

    7. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    8. They spake to one another, saying: What shall they use as a
         plume?
    9. There is a god who never fails to appear at the beginning of day
         (the sun),
    10. At whose right side
    11. There stands a plume-like shaft,
    12. Which the little ones shall use as a plume,
    13. And they shall become difficult to overcome by death.
    14. When the little ones use this plume,
    15. They shall have a plume that will forever stand, as they travel
          the path of life.


3

    16. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    17. They spake to one another, saying: With what shall the little
          ones anoint their hair?
    18. The young male buffalo
    19. Has fat adhering to the muscle on the right side of his spine.
    20. The little ones shall use the oil of this fat to anoint their
          hair.
    21. When they use this fat
    22. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life, O, younger brothers.


4

    23. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    24. They spake to one another, saying: What neck ornament shall they
          put upon him? (the Xo´-ḳa).
    25. The mussel who sitteth upon the earth
    26. They shall always put upon him, O, younger brothers.
    27. The God of Day who sitteth in the heavens,
    28. He shall bring to us,
    29. They shall put upon him the sun as a neck ornament, O, younger
          brothers.
    30. When they make of him (the sun) the means by which to reach old
          age,
    31. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.

WA´-ṬSE-ṬSI AND THE ṬSI´-ZHU WA-SHTA-GE GENTES

As the ceremony of decorating the Xo´-ḳa goes on, the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga
members of the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Wa-shta-ge gens, followed, by those of the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens, go to the house of the father of the child
to be named, and enter to take their places, those of the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi
at the east end on the south side and those of the Ṭsi´-zhu at the
east end on the north side. (Fig. 1.) The house then becomes the
home of these two gentes for the time being and for the purposes of
the ceremony. The Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi is the Peace gens of the Hoⁿ´-ga great
tribal division, its life symbol is the water portion of the earth. The
hereditary chief of the Hoⁿ´-ga division was chosen from this gens. The
Ṭsi´-zhu is the Peace gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu great division. Its life
symbol is the clear blue sky. The hereditary chief of the Ṭsi´-zhu
great division was chosen from this gens.


ṬSI ṬA´-P̣E (APPROACH TO THE HOUSE)

The purpose of the Ḳi´-noⁿ ceremony is to prepare the Xo´-ḳa who
represents the child to be named to approach in the prescribed manner
the house wherein sit the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi and
the Ṭsi´-zhu gentes, the first representing the life-giving power of
water and the latter the life-giving power of the sun whose abode is
in the great blue sky. The Xo´-ḳa is to come to the sacred house as
a suppliant for a full and complete life, uninterrupted by diseases
or accidents, and for an endless line of descendants. The ceremonial
approach of the Xo´-ḳa to the sacred house is called Ṭsi Ṭa´-p̣e (Ṭsi,
house; Ṭa´-p̣e, approach), as to a place of refuge.

[Illustration:

FIG. 1.—Diagram showing places of gentes
in the lodge. 1. Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge; 2. Wa-ṭse-tsi Wa-shta-ge;
3. Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ; 4. Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ; 5. Mi-k’iⁿ´ Wa-noⁿ; 6.
Wa-ça´-be; 7. Tho´-xe; 8. O´poⁿ; 9. Ho´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga; 10. Wa-zha´-zhe
çka; 11. Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga; 12. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga; 13. Sho´-ḳa]

At the close of the Ḳi´-noⁿ ceremony the Xo´-ḳa wraps about his body a
buffalo robe, hair outside, and thus clothed in his sacerdotal attire
he goes out of his own house to make his processional approach to the
sacred house, following his Sho´-ḳa who precedes him in the march.
After the manner of all suppliants who approach Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da, the Xo´-ḳa
carries with him a little pipe with which to make a smoke offering
to that mysterious power that controls all life. The Xo´-ḳa and the
Sho´-ḳa, on their solemn approach to the House of Mystery, keep a
certain distance apart. When they have gone some 40 or 50 paces they
make a pause and the Xo´-ḳa sings the following song, after which he
recites the first section of the wi´-gi-e called Wa´-çi-thu-çe Wi´-gi-e
(Footstep Wi´-gi-e). The song precedes each of the four sections of the
wi´-gi-e:

FOOTSTEP SONG AND WI´-GI-E

    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ stse,
    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ stse he
    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳ-oⁿ stse,
    E the he wi-ṭa doⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ stse he,
    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ stse.


WI´-GI-E


1

    1. Toward what shall the little ones take their footsteps? they
         asked of one another.
    2. It is the Male Star (the sun) who sitteth in the heavens,
    3. Toward which the little ones shall take their footsteps
    4. When the little ones take their footsteps toward the Male Star,
    5. They shall always live to see old age, O, younger brothers, they
         said to one another.


2

    6. Toward what shall the little ones take their footsteps? they
         asked of one another.
    7. It is the Female Star (the moon) who sitteth in the heavens,
    8. Toward which the little ones shall take their footsteps.
    9. When the little ones take their footsteps toward the Female Star,
    10. They shall always live to see old age, O, younger brothers,
          they said to one another.


3

    11. Toward what shall the little ones take their footsteps? they
          asked of one another.
    12. It is the Male Star (the sun) who sitteth in the heavens,
    13. Toward which the little ones shall take their footsteps.
    14. When the little ones take their footsteps toward the Male Star,
    15. They shall always live to see old age, O, younger brothers, they
          said to one another.


4

    16. Toward what shall the little ones take their footsteps? they
          said to one another.
    17. It is the Female Star (the moon) who sitteth in the heavens,
    18. Toward which the little ones shall take their footsteps.
    19. When the little ones take their footsteps toward the Female
          Star,
    20. They shall always live to see old age, O, younger brothers,
          they said to one another.

The words of the processional song:

    Into a star you have cast yourself,
    Into my star you have cast yourself, etc.

are addressed to the child upon whom is to be conferred his personal,
gentile name, and who is to be given his place in the Puma gens into
which he was born. The star referred to in the song is the sun, the
greatest life symbol of the Puma gens.

In the first section of the “Footstep Wi´-gi-e,” which the Xo´-ḳa
recites as he makes his processional approach to the House of Mystery,
the sun is referred to as the “Male Star.” The first line of the
wi´-gi-e, “Toward what shall the little ones take their footsteps,”
implies that much thought was given by the ancient Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga to
the question as to the places where prayers for aid for the attainment
of long life should be directed. The lines that follow imply that
the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga had finally arrived at the belief that if the
“Little Ones” go with their prayers to the “Male Star,” the sun, they
would find the way by which they could reach old age. The authors of
these peculiar rites in speaking of long life did not only mean the
attainment of old age by the child but they also meant the continuity
of its life by procreation.

In the second section of the wi´-gi-e the moon is referred to as the
“Female Star.” The same form that is used for the sun is also used
for the moon. The pairing of these two great cosmic bodies in this
wi´-gi-e suggests a procreative relationship between the two. The last
two sections of the wi´-gi-e are repetitions of the first two. These
repetitions are made in order to complete the mystic number four. The
moon, referred to in the second section as the female star, is the life
symbol of the Wa-ça´-be, or the Black Bear gens.

When the Xo´-ḳa have finished reciting the first section of the Footstep
Wi´-gi-e, which speaks of the approach of the little ones to the sun,
he and the Sho´-ḳa continue their march. Again they pause and the
Xo´-ḳa recites the second section which tells of the approach of the
little ones toward the moon seeking for long life. The fourth pause
brings them to the door of the House of Mystery, which they enter,
followed by the A´-ḳi-hoⁿ Xo´-ḳa and the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of the Puma
gens who are to give their child a place in the visible universe. They
take their place at the east end of the lodge where sit the father and
mother with the child. The Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga who had been called to take
part in the ceremony also enter and take their fixed places, those
belonging to the Hoⁿ´-ga great division at the south side and those of
the Ṭsi´-zhu great division at the north side of the lodge. (Fig. 1.)


THE WA-THE´-THE CEREMONY

When all the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga have become settled in their places,
according to gentes, the A´-ḳi-hoⁿ Xo´-ḳa proceeds with the ceremonial
acts called Wa-the´-the, which, translated literally, means, The
Sending; that is, the sending of a fee of a blanket or other article
of value to each, head of the gentes taking part in the child-naming
ceremony. It is understood by these ceremonial acts that the members
of the gens to whose head is sent a fee are requested to recite the
wi´-gi-e relating to the Life Symbol of their gens. Each article is
received from the hands of the A´-ḳi-hoⁿ Xo´-ḳa by the Sho´-ḳa who
delivers it to the head of the gens for whom it is sent.

Wa-xthi´-zhi, who gives this child-naming ritual of his gens, the Puma,
when acting as A´-ḳi-hoⁿ Xo´-ḳa, sends the fees in the following order:

Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge: Fee, with a red downy eagle feather, symbolizing
the sun. The members of the gens will recite their wi´-gi-e relating
to the life-giving power of the sun. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer.
Ethn., p. 124, lines 1 to 177.)

Wa-ça´-be: Fee; will recite the Zha´-zhe Ḳi-ṭoⁿ Wi´-gi-e, Name Wi´-gi-e
of the gens. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 228, lines 238
to 304.) The Wa-ça´-be and the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga gentes are closely related
and one acts as Sho´-ḳa for the other in their ceremonies of initiation
into the mysteries of the tribal rites.

Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ: Fee; will recite their wi´-gi-e relating to the
life-giving power of the sun, their life symbol. (See 36th Ann. Rept.
Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 118, lines 1 to 36.)

Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ: Fee; will recite wi´-gi-e relating to the mottled
eagle, the “stainless” bird that led the people down from the sky to
the earth. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 162, lines 177 to
311.)

Mi-k’iⁿ´ Wa-noⁿ: Fee; the members of this gens will recite their
wi´-gi-e relating to the moon and all the stars and to their power to
aid the “little ones” to reach old age. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer.
Ethn., p. 122, lines 1 to 44.)

O´-poⁿ: Fee; the members of the gens will recite the Wa-dsu-ṭa
I-hi-thoⁿ-be Wi´-gi-e which tells of the various places of the earth
where the little ones may find the animals on which to live. (See 36th
Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 112, lines 1 to 109.)

Tho´-xe: Fee; some grains of maize are also sent. The members of this
gens will recite the wi´-gi-e relating to the bringing of the maize to
the people by a buffalo bull, and to his offer to aid the little ones
to reach old age. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 280, lines
83 to 110; also p. 134, lines 1 to 162.)

Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Wa-shta-ge: Fee, with cedar fronds. Members of this gens
will recite their wi´-gi-e relating to the red cedar, an evergreen tree
which has power to resist death, and to its offer to aid the little
ones to reach old age. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 95,
lines 1 to 34.)

Ho´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga: Fee, with a kettle of water. The members of this
gens will recite their wi´-gi-e relating to the everflowing water
which, has power to help the little ones to reach old age. These are
the Fish people. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 98, lines 1
to 35.)

Wa-zha´-zhe çka: Fee, with a mussel shell. The mussel is the life
symbol of this gens. The members of the gens will recite their wi´-gi-e
relating to the power of the mussel to resist death, and to its consent
to aid the little ones to reach old age. The Wa-zha´-zhe çka are a
water people. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 94, lines 1 to
29.)

Ṭa I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga, the Deer People: Only a fee is sent to them. The
members will recite their Wa-dsu´-ṭa I-hi-thoⁿ-be Wi´-gi-e, which
tells of the various places of the earth where the deer will reveal
themselves to the little ones to give them help to reach old age. (See
36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 97, lines 44 to 103.)

When the Sho´-ḳa had delivered the last fee every Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga who
knows his wi´-gi-e begins to recite it in a loud voice. None of the
wi´-gi-es are alike and none of the members of a gens recite in unison,
consequently there would be a volume of sounds most bewildering to the
uninitiated.


ZHA´-ZHE ḲI-ṬOⁿ WI´-GI-E

The wi´-gi-e recited by the members of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga gens at this
time is called Zha´-zhe Ḳi-ṭoⁿ Wi´-gi-e, freely translated, the Name
Wi´-gi-e. It is in three parts. The first, which includes sections 1 to
8, is called Zha´-zhe Ḳi-ṭoⁿ, the taking of names; the second, which
includes sections 9 and 10, is called U´-noⁿ U-tha-ge, the telling of
the means by which to reach old age; the third, which includes sections
11 and 12, is called U´-noⁿ-bthe U-gi-dse, the story of the search for
the life-giving foods.


NAME-TAKING WI´-GI-E

(FREE TRANSLATION)


1

    1. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    2. The Hoⁿ´-ga, a people who possess seven fireplaces
    3. Spake to one another, saying: O, younger brothers,
    4. The little ones have become persons,
    5. Should not the little ones go below to become a people? they said
         to one another.
    6. Then, at that very time,
    7. They said: There are four great gods
    8. To whom we shall appeal for aid.
    9. Verily at that time,
    10. They spake to the god of day (the sun) saying:
    11. O, my grandfather,
    12. Our little ones have become persons,
    13. Should they not go below (to the earth) to become a people?
    14. At that very time
    15. The god of day replied: You say the little ones should go below
          to become a people,
    16. When the little ones go below to become a people,
    17. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


2

    18. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    19. They said: The little ones shall go below to become a people.
    20. Then again they spake to the god of day, saying: The little ones
          have no names, O, grandfather.
    21. The god of day replied: O, little ones,
    22. You say your little ones have no names,
    23. Your little ones shall be named after me,
    24. Mi´-wa-ga-xe, Child-of-the-sun,
    25. The little ones shall take, as they travel the path of life.
    26. When they take this for a personal name,
    27. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


3

    28. What shall the little ones take for a personal name? it has been
          said,
    29. Moⁿ-çi´-tse-xi, Sacred-arrowshaft,
    30. The little ones shall take for a name, as they travel the path
          of life.
    31. When they take this for a personal name,
    32. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


4

    33. What shall the little ones take for a personal name?
    34. I´-e-çka-wa-the, Giver-of-clear-speech
    35. The little ones shall take for a name, as they travel the path
          of life.
    36. When they take this for a personal name,
    37. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


5

    38. What shall the little ones take for a personal name?
    39. Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-op-she-wiⁿ, Woman-who-travels-over-the-earth,
    40. The little ones shall take for a name, as they travel the path
          of life.
    41. When they take this for a personal name,
    42. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


6

    43. What shall they take for a personal name?
    44. Moⁿ´-ga-xe, Arrow-maker,
    45. The little ones shall take for a name, as they travel the path
          of life.
    46. When they take this for a personal name,
    47. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


7

    48. What shall the little ones take for a personal name?
    49. Noⁿ´-mi-tse-xi, Beloved-child-of-the-sun,
    50. The little ones shall take for a name, as they travel the path
          of life.
    51. When they take this for a personal name,
    52. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


8

    53. What shall the little ones take for a personal name?
    54. Iⁿ-shta´-sha-be, Dark-eyes,
    55. The little ones shall take for a name, as they travel the path
          of life.
    56. When, they take this for a personal name,
    57. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


9

    58. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    59. They spake to one another, saying: O, younger brothers,
    60. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    61. They went forth with hurrying footsteps,
    62. To the soft stone that sitteth upon the earth.
    63. Verily, at that time,
    64. They spake to him, saying: O, my grandfather,
    65. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    66. The soft stone replied: O, little ones,
    67. You say your little ones have nothing of which to make their
          bodies.
    68. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    69. Verily, at that time and place,
    70. He spake further, saying: When the little ones become ill and
          fretful,
    71. They shall cling to me as one who can produce the heat by which
          they can be purified.


10

    72. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    73. They spake to one another, saying: Give heed, my younger
          brothers,
    74. You will go forth to make further search,
    75. Then, even as these words were spoken, they hastened
    76. To the friable stone,
    77. And, standing close to him,
    78. Spake, saying: O, grandfather, the little ones have nothing of
          which to make their bodies.
    79. The friable stone replied: O, my little ones,
    80. You say the little ones have nothing of which to make their
          bodies.
    81. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    82. When they make of me their bodies,
    83. They shall cling to me as one who can produce the heat by which
          their bodies can be purified.


11

    84. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    85. They spake to one another, saying: O, younger brothers,
    86. The little ones have nothing which they can use for food at all
          times,
    87. You will go and search for such food as they can use for all
          time.
    88. A younger brother hastened
    89. To the very center of a lake,
    90. Where lay the root of the tse´-wa-the (_Nelumbo lutea_).
    91. He hastened home with the root,
    92. And spake, saying: O, elder brothers, how will this serve for
          food?
    93. The elder brothers hastened to try the taste of the root,
    94. Like milk the juice squirted in their mouths,
    95. And they said to one another: O, younger brothers,
    96. This will serve as food for the little ones.
    97. When the little ones make use of this plant as food,
    98. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.


12

    99. There lacks one more, O, younger brothers, they said to one
          another.
    100. You will go forth and make further search.
    101. Even as these words were spoken,
    102. One hastened to the farther borders of the lake,
    103. Where sat the do (_Apios apios_).
    104. Close to it he stood,
    105. Then he hastened home, carrying the plant with him.
    106. Standing before his brothers, he spake, saying: O, elder
           brothers,
    107. How will this serve for food?
    108. They replied: O, younger brother,
    109. That is the very object for which you have been searching.
    110. The elder brothers hastened to try the taste of the root,
    111. Like milk the juice squirted in their mouths.
    112. Then they spake, saying: The little ones shall use this plant
           for food.
    113. When the little ones use this plant for food,
    114. They shall always live to see old age.
    115. It shall make their limbs to stretch in growth, as they travel
           the path of life.

When Wa-xthi´-zhi made up his mind to give a description of the
Child-naming Ritual of his own gens, the Puma, he did not hesitate to
recite the wi´-gi-es and to tell of the ceremonial forms that accompany
the entire ritual. But when asked to recite the wi´-gi-es of the 11
gentes who were summoned to take part in the ceremony of conferring
a name upon a Puma child he declined to give them, although he knew
all of them, for the reason that they were not his to give. He had
not obtained from any of these gentes the right to transfer them to
strangers or to members of other gentes.

It so happened that when Wa-xthi´-zhi was describing the Child-naming
Ritual of his own gens, which he had a perfect right to do, Wa-sho´-she
(pl. 4), a member of the Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ gens, was present. This man,
when asked if he would be willing to give the U´-noⁿ Wi´-gi-e (Old-age
Wi´-gi-e) of his gens for a fee, promptly replied that he would. He had
obtained by purchase from his father the wi´-gi-e and so had acquired
the right to transfer it to anybody, but the transfer must always be
made for a fee. The fee was provided and Wa-sho´-she sat down and
recorded the Old-age Wi´-gi-e of his own gens, the Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ.
This name refers to the “Stainless Bird,” the mottled eagle, who
conducted the Hoⁿ´-ga people to earth from mid-heaven. (See 36th Ann.
Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 162, lines 177 to 199.)

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 3

SHELL GORGET AND DOWNY PLUME (LIFE SYMBOLS)]

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 3

WA-SHO´-SHE (HO^N´-GA A-HIU-TO^N (EAGLE) GENS)]

The first seven lines of the wi´-gi-e refer back to the time when “the
Hoⁿ´-ga who possess seven fireplaces” chose for one of their life
symbols the “Stainless Bird,” the mottled eagle. The people who are
here spoken of as the Hoⁿ´-ga having seven fireplaces are those who
compose the seven gentile groups that represent the land portion of the
earth in the two great tribal divisions symbolizing the cosmos. These
seven gentile groups (seven fireplaces) are, as given by Black-dog.
(See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 52-53.)

    1. Wa-ça´-be-ṭoⁿ, They-who-own-the-black-bear.
    2. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga, Puma.
    3. O-poⁿ, Elk.
    4. Moⁿ-iⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe, Makers-of-the-earth.
    5. Hoⁿ´-ga gthe-zhe, The-mottled-sacred-one.
    6. Xu-tha´, Eagle (the adult golden eagle).
    7. Hoⁿ´-ga zhiⁿ-ga, The-little-sacred-one.

When the “Hoⁿ´-ga, a people who possess seven fireplaces” went to the
“Stainless Bird” and said to him (lines 5, 6, and 7): “The little ones
have nothing of which to make their bodies,” meaning that they have no
symbol for the long life which they crave, he replied in the words as
given in the wi´-gi-e, from line 10 to the end:


OLD-AGE WI´-GI-E

FREE TRANSLATION

    1. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    2. The Hoⁿ´-ga, a people who possess seven fireplaces,
    3. Spake to one another, saying: Lo, we have nothing of which to
         make our bodies.
    4. Then, at that very time,
    5. They spake to the bird that has no stains (evil disposition),
    6. Saying: O, grandfather,
    7. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    8. Then, at that very time,
    9. The bird that has no stains (evil disposition)
    10. Spake, saying: When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    11. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    12. Again the bird spake:
    13. Behold my toes that are gathered together in folds,
    14. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    15. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    16. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    17. Behold, also, the wrinkles upon my shins,
    18. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    19. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    20. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    21. The bird that has no stain
    22. Again spake, saying: Behold the wrinkles upon my knees,
    23. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    24. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    25. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    26. Behold the flaccid muscles of my inner thigh,
    27. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    28. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    29. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    30. Behold the muscles of my breast, gathered together as in a fold,
    31. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    32. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    33. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    34. Behold the flaccid muscles of my arms,
    35. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    36. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    37. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    38. Behold the bend of my shoulders,
    39. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    40. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    41. They shall always live to see their shoulders bent with age, as
          they travel the path of life.
    42. Behold the flaccid muscles of my throat,
    43. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    44. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    45. They shall always live to see old age, as they travel the path
          of life.
    46. Behold the folds in the corners of my eyelids,
    47. Which I have made to be the signs of my old age.
    48. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    49. They shall always live to see the corners of their eyelids
          folded with age, as they travel the path of life.
    50. Behold my eyelids that are gathered into folds,
    51. Which I have made to be the signs of my old age.
    52. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    53. They shall always live to see their eyelids gathered into folds
          with age, as they travel the path of life.
    54. Behold the hair on the crown of my head, now grown thin,
    55. Which I have made to be the sign of my old age.
    56. When the little ones make of me the means of reaching old age,
    57. They shall always live to see the hair on the crown of their
          heads grown thin with age, as they travel the path of life.


WI´-GI-E OF THE WA´-ṬSE-ṬSI GENS

At the close of the recital of the wi´-gi-es by all the
Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga, the Sho´-ḳa places before the head of the Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-shta-ge gens a bowl of water into which had been put fronds of the
red cedar. The red cedar and the water are the life symbols of the
Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, the people who came to earth from the stars. The following
is an epitome of their wi´-gi-e:

    I am a person who is fit for use as a symbol,
    Behold the female red cedar,
    Verily, I am a person who has made of that tree his body.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    They shall always live to see old age.
    Behold the male red cedar,
    The little ones shall always use this tree as a symbol.
    When the little ones use it for a symbol,
    They shall always live to see old age.
    Behold these waters,
    That we shall make to be companions to the tree.
    When the little ones make use of these waters
    As the means of reaching old age,
    They shall always live to see old age.

  —(See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 95.)


WI´-GI-E OF THE BOW PEOPLE

The E-noⁿ´ Miⁿ-dse-ṭoⁿ, a people who belong to the same great tribal
division as the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, use a similar wi´-gi-e, which is as
follows:

    I am a person who is fitted for use as a symbol.
    Verily, in the midst of the rushing waters
    Abides my being.
    Verily, I am a person who has made of the waters his body.
    Behold the right side of the river,
    Of which I have made the right side of my body.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies
    And use the right side of the river
    To make their bodies,
    The right side of their bodies shall be free from all causes of
      death.

    Behold the left side of the river,
    Of which I have made the left side of my body.
    When the little ones also make of it the left side of their bodies,
    The left side of their bodies shall always be free from all causes
      of death.

    Behold the channel of the river,
    Of which I have made the hollow of my body.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    The hollow of their bodies shall always be free from all causes of
      death.

A bowl of shelled corn, the life symbol of the Tho´-xe gens, was also
placed before the head of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens. (For the Maize
Wi´-gi-e of the Tho´-xe gens, see 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p.
135, lines 57 to 113; also p. 277, lines 83 to 110.)

When the bowls of water and cedar fronds and shelled corn are placed
before the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge, the Sho´-ḳa puts in his arms the child
to be blessed and named. The head of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens then
passes the tips of the fingers of his right hand over the bowl of water
and cedar fronds, and the bowl of the life-giving corn, then touches
with the tips of his fingers the lips, head, arms and body of the
child. The two bowls and the child are then passed on to the head of
the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi Wa-shta-ge gens, who goes through the same motions with
the child. The child and the two bowls are then passed on to the heads
of each of the other gentes who make the same motions over the child as
were made by the heads of the first two gentes.

These ceremonial acts performed by the heads of the gentes officiating,
by which the child is brought into touch with the ever-flowing waters,
the red cedar, an everlasting tree, and the life-giving corn, are
supplicatory acts by which the aid of Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da is sought for the
child who is to go forth to take part in the great life activities. Not
only is the attainment of old age desired for the child but also the
continuity of its life by a never-ending line of descendants.

At the close of these ceremonial acts a sacred gentile name is
conferred upon the child without further ceremony. If, however, there
are two or more names to choose from, as is the case in some of the
gentes, the mother of the child has the privilege of making a choice
from two or three names. This privilege is given by the Xo´-ḳa, who
offers to the mother two small sticks prepared for this purpose, each
of which represents a name mentioned in the origin ritual of the gens
naming the child. The mother usually chooses the stick representing the
name which to her has the greater religious significance and is the
most euphonious.


EARTH NAMES AND WI´-GI-ES

It was stated (see p. 33) that earth names as well as sky names were
used by both the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga and the Wa-ça´-be gentes as distinctive
birth names for their children.

In the course of a conversation concerning the gentile names,
classed as sky and earth names, Wa-xthi´-zhi, of the Puma gens,
remarked that: When the Hoⁿ´-ga people were coming from the sky
to the earth they chose two persons (gentes) to act as official
messengers. One of these persons was called Hoⁿ´-ga Wa´-ṭse-gi-ṭsi,
The-sacred-one-from-the-stars, and the other Hoⁿ´-ga Wa-ṭse-ga-wa,
The-sacred-radiant-star. These messengers were expected to find some
way of dispersing the waters that submerged the earth and of exposing
the ground beneath so as to make it habitable for all living creatures.

Wa´-ṭse-gi-ṭsi and Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa, the two messengers, found on the
still waters the water spider, the water beetle, the white leech, and
the dark leech, of whom they asked for aid which they could not give,
but promised to help the people to reach old age. (See 36th Ann. Rept.
Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 163, lines 200 to 273.) The two messengers went
on and they met O´-poⁿ-ṭoⁿ-ga, the Great Elk, and appealed to him
for aid. The Great Elk threw himself upon the waters four times and
splashed about until the ground was exposed and ready to receive men
and animals. He then called to the four corners of the earth for the
life-giving winds to come. Next he threw himself upon the ground and
rolled about; then, as he arose, the hairs of his body clung to the
soil and became the grasses of the earth. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur.
Amer. Ethn., pp. 165-167, lines 274 to 354.)

The two messengers then led the people over the dry land of the
earth, when suddenly Hoⁿ´-ga Wa´-ṭse-gi-ṭsi, The-one-from-the-stars,
came upon Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga, the Puma. The messenger then changed his
name from Wa´-ṭse-gi-ṭsi to Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga. In like manner the Hoⁿ´-ga
Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa, the Radiant Star, came upon Wa-ça´-be, the Black Bear.
The Radiant Star then changed his name from Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa to Wa-ça´-be,
the Black Bear.

These were the first earth names of the two related gentes, the
Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga and the Wa-ça´-be. Wa-xthi´-zhi mentioned several other
personal earth names of these two gentes but he suggested that the
parts of the rituals given by himself and Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ (pl. 5), in
which are mentioned the earth names, be referred to as authoritative,
and so the following paraphrases of those parts of the rituals are here
given.


EARTH NAME WI´-GI-ES

(WA-XTHI´-ZHI)

    The people spake to one another, saying: The little ones have
      nothing to use as a symbol of courage.
    Then, at that very time,
    The Hoⁿ´-ga Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa (Hoⁿ´-ga-radiant-star),
    Went forth with hurried footsteps
    To the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga do-ga, (male puma),
    With whom he stood face to face and spake,
    Saying: The little ones have nothing to use as a symbol of courage,
      O, grandfather.
    The Male puma replied: I am a person whom the little ones may use as
      a symbol of courage.
    The brothers spake in low tones,
    Saying: He is a puma, O, younger brothers,
    Let us take personal names from him;
    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿ´-ga, the Great-puma,
    Shall be our name, O, younger brothers;
    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga-zhiⁿ-ga, the Young-puma,
    Shall be our names, as we travel the path of life.

    The Hoⁿ´-ga Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa, Radiant-star,
    Went forth with hurried footsteps,
    To the Wa-ça´-be, the Black-bear that is without blemish,
    Who stood as in a flame of fire.
    The Radiant-star spake to him, saying: The little ones have nothing
      to use as a symbol of their courage.
    Wa-ça´-be replied: I am a person whom the little ones may use as a
      symbol of their courage.
    The brothers spake to one another, saying: He is a black bear!
    He is very dark in color!
    Let us take from him personal names.
    Sha´-be-ṭsi-gthe, the Dark-one,
    Shall be our name henceforth, as we travel the path of life.
    You have found the Dark-one, O, younger brothers,
    Sha´-be-i-the, Finder-of-the-dark-one,
    Shall be our name, henceforth, as we travel the path of life.
    Look you, O, younger brothers, they said to one another,
    The little ones have nothing to use as a symbol of courage.
    Then they went forth in a body to an open prairie,
    Where sat Mi´-xa-çka, the Great-white-swan.
    Face to face they stood with him and spake,
    Saying: The little ones have nothing to use as a symbol of courage,
      O, grandfather.
    The brothers spake in low tones, saying: O, younger brothers,
    We shall take from him personal names.
    How white he is! the younger ones exclaimed,
    He is a bird,
    A white swan.
    Mi´-xa-çka, the White-swan,
    Shall be our name, O, younger brothers.
    How white he is! they again exclaimed,
    Wa-zhiⁿ´-çka, the White-bird, shall also
    Be our name, O, younger brothers.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 194-195, lines 1063 to
  1115.)

Earth names mentioned in the origin wi´-gi-e given, by Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ.


WI´-GI-E OF THE WA´ṬSE-GI-ṬSI

HE-WHO-CAME-FROM-THE-STARS

    What said they? it has been said, in this house,
    The people spake, saying: O, younger brothers,
    We are a people who give no mercy to the foe.
    Then they spake to the one (gens) who had made of the Puma his body,
    Saying: O, younger brother.
    Hardly were these words spoken when the Puma hastened forth.
    After a time the people said: There are signs that our brother is
      returning.
    Then some of the brothers ran to meet him.

    To their inquiry the Puma replied: O, elder brothers,
    Yonder stands a man,
    Verily, a man whose appearance inspires fear,
    A man who is like us in form.
    The people spake, saying: O, younger brother,
    We are a people who show no mercy to the foe.
    Whoever this man may be,
    We shall send him to the abode of spirits,
    We shall make him to lie low.

    Then toward the man they hastened:
    They made one ceremonial pause.
    At the fourth pause,
    The Puma exclaimed: There he stands!
    It is well, the people replied,
    We shall send him to the abode of spirits.
    Then, at that very time,
    The stranger spake, saying:
    I am a sacred man, O, elder brothers.

    The Puma spake, saying:
    He speaks clearly our language!
    I am Hoⁿ´-ga Wa´-ṭse-gi-ṭsi, a sacred person come from the stars,
      the stranger continued.
    I am Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge,[1] The-young-chief;
    I am Wa´-ṭse-ga-hi-ge, The-star-chief;
    I am Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa, The-star-radiant;
    I am Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ, The-traveling-star.

    That pleases us! the people exclaimed.
    Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge, The-young-chief, the stranger went on,
    Shall be your name, as you travel the path of life;
    Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa, The-star-radiant,
    Shall also be your name, as you travel the path of life.
    I have done much to make you contented and happy.
    We are pleased! the people exclaimed,
    We shall henceforth put away all anger and hatred,
    We shall accept the names thus offered us.
    Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge, The-young-chief,
    Shall be our name,
    Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa, The-star-radiant,
    Shall be our name.
    I´-e-çka-wa-the, He-speaks-clearly,
    We shall also take as a name in his honor,
    P̣a´-thiⁿ-hoⁿ-ga, The-sacred-stranger,
    We shall also take as a name in his honor.

[1] The name Zhin-ga´-ga-hi-ge is still used in the Ṭa-p̣a´ gens of the
Omaha, a cognate tribe.

Mi´-xa-çka, the white swan from whom personal names were taken, as
mentioned in the following wi´-gi-e given by Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ, is a
warrior symbol. The black color on its feet and on the tip of its nose
typifies the fire that knows no mercy. The standards (crooks), which
were carried by an Osage war party (pl. 6, _a_), typify the neck of the
white swan.


MI´-XA-ÇKA, THE WHITE SWAN

    The people spake to one another, saying:
    We have nothing of which to make a symbol (war standard).
    They spake to the Puma (gens), saying:
    Go thou and make search (for materials).
    Even as these words were spoken the Puma went forth to search.

    In time he hastened homeward,
    And, standing before the elder brothers, he spake, saying:
    O, elder brothers, what appears to be an animal,
    Is in yonder place.
    Make haste! the people said to one another,
    We shall send him to the abode of spirits.
    Verily, we are a people who give no mercy to the foe.

    They made one ceremonial pause,
    The fourth pause brought them close to the place.
    Then the Puma spake, saying: There he stands! O, elder brothers.
    An elder brother pointed with his index finger at the bird,
    And it fell to the ground in death, its feathers strewing the earth.
    They gathered around the fallen bird and stood.

    Then one spake, saying: It is a swan! O, elder brothers,
    A white swan!
    Even from its white plumage
    We shall take personal names,
    Mi´-xa-çka, White-swan,
    Wa-zhiⁿ´-ga-çka, White-bird,
    And Moⁿ´-shoⁿ-çka, White-feathers,
    The little ones shall be named, as they travel the path of life.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 228-231, lines 238
  to 358.)

The earth names given by Wa-xthi´-zhi, of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga (Puma) gens,
in his wi´-gi-es are as follows:

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿ-ga, the Great-puma.
    2. Inⁿ-gṭhoⁿ´-ga-zhiⁿ-ga, the Young-puma.
    3. Sha´-be-ṭsi-gthe, the Dark-one.
    4. Sha´-be-i-the, Finder-of-the-dark-one.
    5. Mi´-xa-çka, the White-swan.
    6. Wa-zhiⁿ´-çka, the White-bird.

The earth names given by Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Wa-ça´-be (Black Bear)
gens in his wi´-gi-es:

    1. Wa´-ṭse-gi-ṭsi, He-who-came-from-the-stars.
    2. Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge, Young-chief.
    3. Wa´-ṭse-ga-hi-ge, Star-chief.
    4. Wa-ṭse´-ga-wa, Star-radiant.
    5. Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Traveling-star.
    6. I´-e-çka-wa-the, He-speaks-clearly.
    7. P̣a´-thiⁿ-hoⁿ-ga, The-sacred-stranger.
    8. Mi´-xa-çka, White-swan.
    9. Wa-zhiⁿ´-ga-çka, White-bird.
    10. Moⁿ-shoⁿ-çka, White-feather.

The following earth names, not specifically mentioned by Wa-xthi´-zhi,
also appear in the wi´-gi-es recorded by himself and by Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ.
These names are also regarded as sacred and are ceremonially bestowed
upon the children of the Puma and Black Bear gentes:


WA-XTHI´-ZHI

1. Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-çi-i-ba-btho-ga, Round-handled-knife. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur.
Amer. Ethn., p. 206, line 1399.)

2. Monⁿ´-hiⁿ-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred-knife. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn.,
p. 207, line 1424.)

3. Moⁿ-hiⁿ-zhu-dse, Red-knife. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p.
208, line 1439.)

4. The fourth name given by Wa-xthi´-zhi (Noⁿ-be´-wa-koⁿ-da,
Mysterious-hand) does not appear in any of the wi´-gi-es given either
by himself or by Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ. However, the Mysterious-hand is spoken
of by both of these men in their conversations concerning the rites,
and is referred to in some of the wi´-gi-es. (See 36th Ann. Rept.,
p. 230, lines 323 to 340.) The story of the Mysterious-hand, as told
colloquially, is that when the people came from the sky to the earth
they had no weapons, but they killed animals by moistening the index
finger of the right hand with saliva and pointing it at them. This name
is also bestowed ceremonially.


WA-ṬSE´-MO^N-I^N

1. Miⁿ´-ṭse-xi, Sacred-robe. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 235,
line 510.)

2. Noⁿ´-ḳa-dsi-wiⁿ, Spine-woman. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p.
235, line 512.)

3. Ṭse´-p̣a´-ga-xe, Buffalo-head-maker. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer.
Ethn., p. 235, line 518.)

4. Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-zhu-dse, Red-knife. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p.
237, line 573.)

5. Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred-knife. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p.
237, line 576.)


SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS TO THE MOTHER

At the close of the ceremony of blessing the child by the various
gentes officiating, the Sho´-ḳa conducts the mother to a seat prepared
for her in front of the Xo´-ḳa, who gives her special instructions in
the ceremonies to be observed by her to complete the child-naming
rite. Between the two is spread a buffalo robe which had been decorated
with certain symbolic designs. (Fig. 2.) This formal talk to the mother
is called “Ḳi´-noⁿ U-tha-ge,” Telling of the Symbolic Painting. Extra
fees are required for the special instruction, which, with the help of
friends and relatives, the mother is enabled to pay.

[Illustration:

FIG. 2.—Symbolic robe prepared for children]

If the mother is skilled with her awl and thread in ornamental work she
would decorate with porcupine quills the symbolic robe to be used in
this special ceremony; if not skilled, she would content herself with
painting the symbolic designs on the robe.

When the robe has been spread before the Xo´-ḳa he begins to talk, as
follows:

Wi-ṭsi-ni-e´, My daughter-in-law, I see you have brought with you a
robe which you have dressed and decorated for the comfort of your
little one. It is a sacred robe which should be put to use with proper
ceremony. This ceremony you will observe for a period of four days,
during which you will paint red the parting or your hair. It will be
a sign that you appeal for a long and fruitful life for yourself and
child, to the god of day whose path lies over the middle of the earth.

You have reddened the head and the forelegs of the robe. The head and
forelegs of the robe typify that part of the earth whence rises the
god of day to take his westward journey. Red is the color of the day
when it is young, the time when you will rise and go forth to prepare
food for the little one whose tender life is wholly dependent upon your
efforts. A narrow line runs from the head of the robe along the middle
of the back to the tail. This line typifies the path of the god of
day who ever travels from east to west. Midway of the path is a round
spot which represents the god of day when it has reached the middle of
heaven. Here he marks the time when you will turn your thoughts from
other things to the feeding of the little one so that the nourishing of
its life may be continuous. The god of day continues his journey and in
time reaches the edge of the earth, behind which he finally disappears.
The hind legs and the tail of the robe are reddened to typify the
glow that warns us of the ending of the day when your thoughts will
again turn to the care of the little one. When you put these symbolic
marks upon this sacred robe your thoughts reached out in appeal to
Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da for yourself and child.

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 5

WA-ṬSE´-MO^N-I^N (WA-ÇA´-BE (BLACK BEAR) GENS)]

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTH-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 6

_a_, WAR STANDARD (SYMBOLIZES THE WHITE SWAN)

_b_, ṬSE´-WA-THE ROOT (NELUMBO LUTEA), USED FOR FOOD]

As the shadow of night spreads over the land you will take your little
one in your arms, draw this robe over you, then rest in sleep. The robe
which you draw over yourself and child typifies the heaven, whence
comes all life, and the act is an appeal to heaven for protection.

The procuring of food for the little one should always be done with
a feeling of gratitude toward the Mysterious Power that brings forth
life in all forms. There is a plant which is dedicated to use as a
sacred food in the bringing up of the little ones, known as ṭse´-wa-the
(_Nelumbo lutea_) (pl. 6, _b_). (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p.
183, lines 910 to 923.) You will at times go to the lake to gather the
roots of this plant for use in feeding your little one. When about to
go to the lake you will paint red the parting of your hair, as a sign
of your gratitude to the god of day who passes over your head and over
the plant you go to seek, shedding his life-giving power upon you as he
goes upon his journey.

When you come to the edge of the lake you will look about for a staff
to support you as you work in the water. You will choose the willow
for your staff, for it is a tree that clings persistently to life. By
this act you will make an appeal to the great Life-giving Power for a
long and fruitful life for yourself and the little one. With the willow
staff in your hands you will step into the water and take up from the
soft earth beneath a root of the sacred plant, the ṭse´-wa-the. You
will find clinging to the root some of the soft earth from which the
plant draws nourishment and strength. Take this bit of soil and touch
your forehead and body with it, an act which will be as a sign that you
appeal to the earth wherein there is Life-giving Power. When you have
performed this act return the root to the earth beneath the water, with
the wish that the plant shall forever be plentiful. Then gather enough
of the roots to satisfy the little one and yourself.

The maize is another sacred life-giving plant. You raise this plant
from year to year. When you prepare the ground for planting the seed
you will take one grain and put it in a hill, you will press down upon
it the soil with your foot, and say: “My father-in-law bade me do this,
as an expression of my faith that the sky and the earth will yield to
me not only one ear of maize but one animal as well, or even one herd
of animals.” In the next hill you will put two grains, in the next
three, the next four, the next five, the next six, and in the seventh
seven, always repeating the words at each planting.

The ceremony closes with the end of the special instructions given
to the mother of the child blessed and named, and as each member of
the gentes who had taken part in the rite rises to go he makes some
pleasant remarks to the father and the mother.

When the mother goes to her field to plant the seeds of the maize she
remembers the instructions and follows them in every detail. As the
maize matures and the ears are still green and tender the mother cuts
the stalks from the hills she had ceremonially made, leaving the ears
on the stalks. She ties the stalks in bundles, and, with the aid of
friends, carries them home to her house. She then prepares a feast to
which she invites the man who had acted as Xo´-ḳa at the ceremonial
naming of her child. He in turn invites some of his friends who had
acted as Xo´-ḳa in child-naming ceremonies to come and share in the
feast prepared for him.

If among the invited guests there happens to be a member of the Tho´-xe
gens, learned in the rituals, he is requested by the honored guest to
recite the maize wi´-gi-e of his gens.

A paraphrase is here given of the wi´-gi-e which the Tho´-xe recite to
give pleasure to the host and to the guests. The mythical story points
to mid-heaven as the region of the conception of life forms, and as
the starting point of the Osage people in their journey to earth, the
region of actual birth into bodily existence.


ORIGIN WI´-GI-E OF THE THO´-XE GENS

    The people spake to one another, saying: Lo, the little ones are
      not a people,
    Let search be made by the younger brothers for a place where the
      little ones may become a people.
    Even as these words were being spoken, a younger brother
    Hastened to the first division of heaven,
    Close to which he came and paused,
    When, returning to the elder brothers, he spake, saying:
    Verily, nothing of importance has come to my notice.
    Make further search, O, younger brothers, the people said,
    The little ones are not a people.

    Then, a younger brother,
    Even as these words were being spoken,
    Hastened to the second division of heaven, where he paused,
    When, as the god of darkness cast a shadow upon the heavens,
    He returned to the eldest brothers and stood.
    They looked up and spake, saying: How has it fared with you? It
      was not your wont to suffer so, O, younger brother.
    He replied: I have been to the second division of heaven.
    It is not possible for the little ones to become a people there.

    O, Younger brother,
    We bid you make further search, the people said.
    Even as these words were being spoken,
    One hastened to the third division of heaven,
    He drew near and paused.
    The younger brother,
    As the god of darkness cast a shadow upon the heavens,
    Returned to the elder brothers and stood.
    The elder brothers spake: How has it fared with you? It was not
      your wont to suffer so.
    The younger brother replied: It is impossible!

    O, younger brother, the people said,
    We bid you make further search.
    Then a younger brother
    Hastened to the
    Fourth division of heaven.
    Close to it he came and paused.
    Then the Man of Mystery, the god of the clouds,
    Drew near and stood before him.

    The younger brother turned to the elder brothers and said: Here
      stands a man!
    A fear-inspiring man!
    His name, I verily believe, is Fear-inspiring.
    The people spake to him, saying: O, grandfather!
    The Man of Mystery replied: I am a person of whom your little ones
       may make their bodies.
    When they make of me their bodies,
    They shall cause themselves to be deathless.

    Little-hawk
    They shall take for their personal name,
    Then shall they always live to see old age.
    Hawk-maiden, also,
    Is a name that is mine.
    That name also
    Your little ones shall take to be their name,
    Then shall they always live to see old age.

    O, younger brother! the people said,
    And the younger brother went in haste
    To the Tho´-xe (the Buffalo-bull),
    Close to whom he stood and spake, saying:
    O, grandfather!

    Then to the elder brothers he said: Here stands a man!
    A fear-inspiring man!
    The Tho´-xe spake: I am a person of whom the little ones may make
      their bodies.
    Whereupon he threw himself to the ground,
    Then up sprang the blazing star,
    From the earth where it stood in all its beauty, pleasing to look
      upon.
    Tho´-xe spake, saying: Of this plant also the little ones may make
      their bodies.
    The people tasted the root of the plant,
    And exclaimed: It is bitter to the taste!
    Tho´-xe spake, saying: This plant shall be medicine to the little
      ones.
    When they use it as medicine,
    Their arms shall lengthen in growth,
    And they shall live to see old age.

    Again Tho´-xe threw himself upon the ground,
    And the poppy mallow
    Sprang from the earth and stood resplendent in its reddened
      blossoms.
    Of this plant also Tho´-xe said,
    The little ones shall make their bodies.
    When they use it as medicine,
    Their arms shall lengthen in growth.
    The root is astringent,
    And, referring thereto, your little ones shall take the name
      Astringent.
    When the little ones make of this plant their bodies,
    They shall always live to see old age.

    Tho´-xe (the Buffalo-bull),
    Threw himself to the ground,
    And a red ear of maize
    He tossed in the air,
    As he exclaimed: The little ones shall make of this their bodies!
    Then shall they always live to see old age.

    Again Tho´-xe threw himself to the ground,
    And a blue ear of maize,
    Together with a blue squash,
    He tossed in the air as he said,
    These plants, also,
    Shall be food for the little ones,
    Then shall they live to see old age.

    A third time he threw himself to the ground,
    And a white ear of maize,
    Together with a white squash he tossed in the air,
    As he exclaimed: These plants also shall be food for the little
      ones!
    Then shall they be difficult for death to overcome them,
    And they shall always live to see old age.

    A fourth time he threw himself to the ground,
    And a speckled ear of maize,
    Together with a speckled squash,
    He tossed in the air as he exclaimed:
    What creature is there that would be without a mate!
    And he wedded together the maize and the squash,
    Then exclaimed: These also shall be food for the little ones!
    And they shall be difficult for death to overcome them.

The feasting of the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga upon the fruits of the seeds of
the maize planted by the mother with religious care in the seven sacred
hills completes the rite of the naming of her child, by which its right
to a place in its gens is formally recognized; the child has a place,
not only in its gens, but also in the sky and the earth which the two
great tribal divisions, the Hoⁿ´-ga and the Ṭsi´-zhu, represent.




CHILD-NAMING RITUAL OF THE ṬSI´-ZHU WA-SHTA-GE GENS

(SHOⁿ´-GE-MOⁿ-Iⁿ)


The Child-naming ritual of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens of the Osage
tribe, here recorded, was given by Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ, a member of the
Ba´-po subgens of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens. The name Ba´-po
(Popper in English), Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ explained, is the name of the
elder tree, the trunk of which boys, from time reaching beyond memory,
used for making poppers. The name refers to a mythical story and to a
ceremonial office. The mythical story is as follows: When the people of
the Ṭsi´-zhu great division descended from the sky to make the earth
their home they came down as eagles, and they alighted on a great red
oak tree. The shock of their alighting caused the acorns to drop from
the tree in great profusion, which was taken as a prophecy that the
Ṭsi´-zhu would become a numerous people. One eagle was crowded off the
tree, but as he dropped down he alighted upon a blossoming elder tree.
This eagle was a peace bird and his alighting on the ba´-po tree made
it to become a peace symbol. The Ba´-po subgens was given the office of
furnishing a pipestem for the peace pipe in the keeping of the Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-shta-ge gens, and the Ba´-po made the stem of an elder sapling a
symbol of peace.

When Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ is called by a member of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
gens to act as Xo´-ḳa (instructor) in the ceremonial naming of his
child he goes to the house of the father without any formality. Usually
the call is made when the sun is traveling downward (afternoon); when
he receives the message he promptly responds to the call. On his
arrival at the house the father, in a formal speech, informs him that
his summons was for the purpose of asking him to conduct the ceremonies
to be performed at the naming of his child. When Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ gives
his consent to officiate at the ceremony the fees for the men who are
to take part are placed before him. These he examines to make sure that
there are enough articles to go around, and to see if the man had also
provided a pipe for the Sho´-ḳa or Official Messenger.


CERTAIN GENTES CALLED TO TAKE PART IN THE CEREMONY

Being satisfied that the man had supplied all the necessary articles,
he places in the hands of the father the ceremonial pipe and bids
him go after the Sho´-ḳa of the gens. The father returns with the
messenger who was already invested with the little pipe, the badge of
his authority. When the two men had taken their seats Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ
directs the Sho´-ḳa to go and call the heads of the following gentes,
with their Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga members, to come to the house of the
father, at sunrise the next morning, to take part in the ceremonies of
naming his child:

1. Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, of the Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision, to recite their
wi´-gi-e relating to their life symbol, the red cedar. (36th Ann. Rept.
Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 95, lines 1 to 34.)

2. Noⁿ´-poⁿ-da, Deer gens, of the Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision, to recite
their wi´-gi-e relating to one of their life symbols, the water. (36th
Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 98, lines 1 to 25.)

3. I´-ba-ṭse Ṭa-dse, Wind People, of the Hoⁿ´-ga subdivision, to recite
their wi´-gi-e relating to one of their life symbols, the maize.

4. Tho´-xe, Buffalo-bull gens of the Ṭsi-zhu great division, to recite
their wi´-gi-e relating to the maize. Tho´-xe is the gens that gave
to the people the maize and the squashes. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer.
Ethn., p. 279, lines 54 to 110.) The Tho´-xe authorized the I´-ba-ṭse
and certain other gentes to use the Maize ritual in their child-naming
ceremonies.

5. Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe, Wolf gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu great division, to recite
their wi´-gi-e relating to their life symbol, the sun. The Dog-star is
also one of their life symbols. (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p.
118, lines 1 to 36.)


WA-ZHO´-I-GA-THE (LIFE SYMBOL) WI´-GI-E

The Sho´-ḳa returns to the house of the father and reports that he
has given notice to all the gentes named to attend the ceremony. Then
Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ proceeds to recite the Wa-zho´-i-ga-the Wi´-gi-e of his
gens, a name which means, The Taking of Bodies; that is, The Taking of
Life Symbols. The reciting of this wi´-gi-e is for the benefit of the
father and the child.


THE TAKING OF LIFE SYMBOLS.

FREE TRANSLATION

1

    1. The people spake to one another, saying: Lo, the little ones
         have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    2. Take heed, O, younger brothers, and see what can be done.
    3. Then to the youngest of the brothers they spake, saying:
    4. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies, O,
         younger brother.
    5. Hardly were these words spoken,
    6. When the young messenger stood before the God of Day (the sun),
         to whom he spake, saying:
    7. O, my grandfather!
    8. The God of Day replied: My grandchild!
    9. The messenger spake: The little ones have nothing of which to
         make their bodies, O, grandfather.
    10. The God of Day spake: I am a person of whom the little ones
          may well make their bodies,
    11. I am a god who has power to resist death.
    12. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    13. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
          path of life.
    14. Even among the gods,
    15. There is not one who is able to see my path.
    16. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    17. Even the gods
    18. Shall not be able to see their path, as they travel the path of
          life.


2

    19. Again the people spake, saying: O, younger brothers,
    20. Take heed and see what can be done,
    21. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    22. They spake to the youngest of the brothers, saying:
    23. O, younger brother,
    24. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    25. Take heed and see what can be done.
    26. Hardly were these words spoken
    27. When the young messenger stood before the Goddess of Night
          (the moon),
    28. To whom he spake, saying: O, my grandmother!
    29. The Goddess of Night replied: My grandchild!
    30. The messenger spake: The little ones have nothing of which to
          make their bodies.
    31. Then spake the Goddess of Night: I am a person of whom the
          little ones may well make their bodies,
    32. I am a goddess who has power to resist death.
    33. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    34. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
          path of life.
    35. Even among the gods
    36. There is not one who is able to see my path.
    37. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    38. Even the gods
    39. Shall not be able to see their path, as they travel the path
          of life.
    40. Even among the gods
    41. There is not one of them who can stand in my way to prevent my
          going.
    42. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    43. Even the gods
    44. Shall not be able to stand in their way, as they travel the
          path of life.
    45. Moreover, I have been able to bring myself to see old age.
    46. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    47. They also shall bring themselves to see old age, as they travel
    the path of life.
    48. I have brought myself to the days that are calm and peaceful.
    49. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    50. They also shall bring themselves to the calm and peaceful days,
          as they travel the path of life.


3

    51. Again the people spake, saying: Lo, the little ones have
          nothing of which to make their bodies,
    52. Take heed and see what can be done, O, younger brothers.
    53. Then they spake to the youngest of the brothers,
    54. Saying: O, younger brother!
    55. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    56. Take heed and see what can be done.
    57. Even as these words were being spoken,
    58. He stood before the Male Star (Morning Star) who sitteth in the
          heavens,
    59. And spake to him, saying: O, grandfather!
    60. The Male Star replied: My grandchild!
    61. The messenger spake: The little ones have nothing of which to
          make their bodies.
    62. The Male Star replied: I am a person of whom the little ones
          may well make their bodies.
    63. I am a god who has power to resist death.
    64. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    65. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
          path of life.
    66. Even among the gods
    67. There is not one who is able to see my path.
    68. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    69. Even the gods
    70. Shall not be able to see their path, as they travel the path
          of life.
    71. Even among the gods
    72. There is not one who can stand in my way to prevent my going,
    73. When the little ones make of me their bodies.
    74. Even the gods
    75. Shall not be able to stand in their way to prevent their going.
    76. Moreover, I have been able to bring myself to see old age.
    77. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    78. They also shall be able to bring themselves to see old age, as
          they travel the path of life.
    79. They shall also live to see the days that are calm and peaceful.
    80. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    81. They shall be able to bring themselves to the calm and peaceful
          days, as they travel the path of life.

4

    82. The people spake, saying: O, younger brothers,
    83. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    84. Take heed and see what can be done.
    85. Then they spake to the youngest of the brothers,
    86. Saying: O, younger brother,
    87. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    88. Take heed and see what can be done.
    89. Even as these words were being spoken,
    90. The messenger stood before the Female Star (Evening Star) who
          sitteth in the heavens,
    91. And spake to her, saying: O, my grandmother!
    92. The Female Star replied: My grandchild!
    93. The messenger spake: The little ones have nothing of which to
          make their bodies.
    94. The Female Star replied: I am a person of whom the little ones
          may well make their bodies.
    95. I am a god who has power to resist death.
    96. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    97. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
          path of life.
    98. Even among the gods
    99. There is not one who can stand in my way to prevent my going.
    100. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    101. Even the gods
    102. Shall not be able to stand in their way to stop their going.
    103. Moreover, I have been able to bring myself to see old age.
    104. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    105. They also shall be able to bring themselves to see old age, as
           they travel the path of life.
    106. I have been able to bring myself to the calm and peaceful days.
    107. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    108. They also shall be able to bring themselves to the calm and
           peaceful days, as they travel the path of life.


5

    109. The people spake, saying: O, younger brothers,
    110. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    111. Then to the youngest of the brothers
    112. They spake, saying: O, younger brother,
    113. Take heed and see what can be done.
    114. Even as these words were being spoken,
    115. The messenger stood before the Litter (Ursa Major), who stands
           in the heavens,
    116. To whom he spake, saying, O, grandfather!
    117. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    118. The Litter replied: I am a person of whom the little ones may
           well make their bodies.
    119. I am a god who has power to resist death.
    120. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    121. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
           path of life.
    122. Even among the gods
    123. There is not one who is able to see my path.
    124. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    125. Even the gods
    126. Shall not be able to see their path, as they travel the path
           of life.
    127. Even among the gods
    128. There is not one who can stand in my way to prevent my going.
    129. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    130. Even the gods
    131. Shall not be able to stand in their way to prevent their going.
    132. Moreover, I have been able to bring myself to see old age.
    133. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    134. They also shall be able to bring themselves to see old age.
    135. I have been able to bring myself to the calm and peaceful days.
    136. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    137. They also shall be able to bring themselves to the calm and
           peaceful days, as they travel the path of life.


6

    138. The people spake, saying: The little ones have nothing of
           which to make their bodies,
    139. Give heed, younger brothers, and see what can be done.
    140. Then to the youngest of the brothers,
    141. They spake, saying: O, younger brother,
    142. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    143. Even as these words were being spoken,
    144. The messenger stood before Deer-head (Pleiades), who sitteth
           in the heavens,
    145. To whom he spake, saying: O, my grandmother!
    146. She replied: My grandchild!
    147. The messenger spake: The little ones have nothing of which to
           make their bodies.
    148. Deer-head replied: I am a person of whom the little ones may
           well make their bodies,
    149. I am a god who has power to resist death.
    150. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    151. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
           path of life.
    152. Even among the gods
    153. There is not one who is able to see my path.
    154. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    155. Even the gods
    156. Shall not be able to see their path, as they travel the path
           of life.
    157. Even among the gods
    158. There is not one who can stand in my way to prevent my going.
    159. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    160. Even the gods
    161. Shall not be able to stand in their way to prevent their going.
    162. Moreover, I have been able to bring myself to see old age.
    163. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    164. They also shall be able to bring themselves to see old age.
    165. I have been able to bring myself to the calm and peaceful days.
    166. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    167. They also shall be able to bring themselves to the calm and
           peaceful days, as they travel the path of life.


7

    168. The people spake, saying: The little ones have nothing of which
           to make their bodies,
    169. Give heed, O, younger brothers, and see what can be done.
    170. Then to the youngest of the brothers,
    171. They spake, saying: O, younger brother,
    172. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    173. Take heed and see what can be done.
    174. Even as these words were being spoken,
    175. The messenger stood before Three-deer (Orion’s belt), who
           stands in the heavens,
    176. To whom he spake, saying: O, grandfather!
    177. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    178. Three-deer replied: I am a person of whom the little ones may
           well make their bodies,
    179. I am a god who has power to resist death.
    180. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    181. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
           path of life.
    182. Even among the gods
    183. There is not one who is able to see my path.
    184. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    185. Even the gods
    186. Shall not be able to see their path, as they travel the path
           of life.
    187. Even among the gods
    188. There is not one who can stand in my way to prevent my going.
    189. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    190. Even the gods
    191. Shall not be able to stand in their way to prevent their going.
    192. Moreover, I have been able to bring myself to see old age.
    193. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    194. They also shall have the power to bring themselves to see old
           age.
    195. I have been able to bring myself to the calm and peaceful days.
    196. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    197. They also shall be able to bring themselves to the calm and
           peaceful days, as they travel the path of life.


8

    198. The people spake, saying: The little ones have nothing of which
           to make their bodies, O, younger brothers,
    199. Take heed and see what can be done.
    200. Then to the youngest of the brothers
    201. They spake, saying: O, younger brother,
    202. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    203. Take heed and see what can be done.
    204. Even as these words were being spoken,
    205. The messenger stood before Double-star (Theta and Iota in
           Orion) who sitteth in the heavens,
    206. To whom he spake, saying: O, grandmother!
    207. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    208. Double-star replied: I am a person of whom the little ones may
           well make their bodies.
    209. I am a god who has power to resist death.
    210. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    211. They also shall have power to resist death, as they travel the
           path of life.
    212. Even among the gods
    213. There is not one who is able to see my path.
    214. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    215. Even the gods
    216. Shall not be able to see their path, as they travel the path
           of life.
    217. Even among the gods
    218. There is not one who can stand in my way to prevent my going.
    219. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    220. Even the gods
    221. Shall not be able to stand in their way to prevent their going.
    222. Moreover, I have been able to bring myself to see old age.
    223. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    224. They also shall be able to bring themselves to see old age.
    225. I have been able to bring myself to the calm and peaceful days.
    226. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    227. They also shall be able to bring themselves to the calm and
           peaceful days, as they travel the path of life.

At the close of the wi´-gi-e Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ and the Sho´-ḳa are
invited by the family to join them in the evening meal, after which the
two men go home.


THE XO´-ḲA CEREMONIALLY CONDUCTED TO THE CHILD’S HOUSE

Before sunrise the next morning the Sho´-ḳa, carrying his little pipe,
the badge of his office, goes to Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ’s house to conduct
him to the house of the child to be named. Upon receiving the formal
message from the Sho´-ḳa, Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ takes his paint pouch from
a bag containing his personal belongings and puts some red paint on
the inner surface of his hands. Then as the eastern clouds take from
the rising sun a crimson tinge, he lifts his hands, palms outward,
toward them and the sun itself. After a silent pause he withdraws his
hands and reddens his face with the paint on them, as though with
the color of the sun, and his messengers, the reddened clouds. When
he has put upon his face the sacred color he takes from a package
in which he keeps his ornamental feathers a red downy eagle feather
which he fastens to his scalplock so that the red feather, the life
symbol of his gens, stands firm and upright. In the days when buffalo
were plentiful the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga who is to act as Xo´-ḳa at the
child-naming ceremony wore a buffalo robe with the hair outside, but
since the extinction of that animal he substituted for the robe a woven
blanket obtained from traders.

Having thus decorated himself with red paint and the red feather,
symbols of the sky, and the substitute of the buffalo robe, an earth
symbol, Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ, now actual Xo´-ḳa, goes forth to the house of
the child to be named, following the Sho´-ḳa, who leads the way. It was
explained by the old man that the manner of approach of his gens, the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge, to the house of the child was very simple, that it
did not have the elaborate ceremonial forms described by Wa-xthi´-zhi
that were followed by his gens, the Puma, and the other war gentes of
the Hoⁿ´-ga great division.

Arriving at the house, the Sho´-ḳa enters without pause and leads the
Xo´-ḳa to his place at the left of the father, who sits with his wife
and child at the east end of the house. When the Xo´-ḳa has taken his
seat the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of his gens, the Ṭsi-zhu Wa-shta-ge, enter
and take their places back of the Xo´-ḳa and the parents and sit in a
row occupying the entire width of the house. Then the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga
of the other gentes who are to take part in the ceremony enter, those
of the Hoⁿ´-ga great division taking their accustomed places at the
south side and those of the Ṭsi´-zhu great division at the north side
of the house. (Fig. 1.) Except for the blankets of various colors, the
Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga were decorated alike, their faces painted red, the
color of the sun and the dawn, and a red downy feather fastened to the
scalplock of each one.


A LIFE SYMBOL SENT TO EACH OF THE OFFICIATING GENTES

When all the Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga had settled down in their places, and had
exchanged with each other the usual social greetings, Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ
opens the proceedings with a formal statement, setting forth the
purpose of the gathering and adding some pertinent remarks concerning
the ancient rite of naming the children and their formal recognition as
members of the tribe. He then goes on to the ceremony of distributing
the fees and the symbolic articles to be used in the rite. The
distribution was made in the following order:

1. To the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, Star gens of the Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision of the
Hoⁿ´-ga great division, he sent, by the Sho´-ḳa, cedar fronds with fee.
The cedar is a life symbol of the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi gens.

2. To the Tho´-xe, Buffalo-bull gens, of the Ṭsi´-zhu great division, a
bowl of shelled corn with fee. The maize is one of the life symbols of
the Tho´-xe.

3. To the Noⁿ´-poⁿ-da, Deer gens of the Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision of the
Hoⁿ´-ga great division, a bowl of water with fee. Water is one of the
life symbols of the Noⁿ´-poⁿ-da.

4. To the Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe, Wolf-tail gens, of the Ṭsi´-zhu great
division, fee only. The sun is one of the life symbols of this gens.
The Dog-star is also one of its symbols.

5. I´-ba-ṭse Ṭa-dse, Wind gens of the Hoⁿ´-ga subdivision of the
Hoⁿ´-ga great division, a bowl of shelled corn. The Tho´-xe authorized
the I´-ba-ṭse to use the maize ritual. This gens also has the office
of performing the ceremonies by which the souls of warriors slain in
battle are sent direct to the spirit land.


MEMBERS OF THE OFFICIATING GENTES RECITE THEIR WI´-GI-ES
SIMULTANEOUSLY

When the Sho´-ḳa, the Ceremonial Messenger, had made the last delivery
of the symbolic articles and fees to the gentes above named, each
Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga begins to recite the wi´-gi-e of his gens relating to
its life symbol, such as the cedar fronds, the corn or water. As each
Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga recites the wi´-gi-e of his gens, old Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ
recites the Name Wi´-gi-e of his own gens, the Ṭsi-zhu Wa-shta-ge,
which is as follows:


THE NAME WI´-GI-E

FREE TRANSLATION

1

    1. The people spake to one another, saying: O, younger brothers,
    2. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    3. Take heed and see what can be done.
    4. Then to the youngest of the brothers they spake,
    5. Saying: O, younger brother,
    6. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    7. You will give heed and see what can be done.
    8. Even as these words were being spoken
    9. To the first division of heaven,
    10. The messenger verily descended,
    11. Where the little ones had not yet become a people.


2

    12. Again the people spake, saying: O, younger brothers,
    13. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    14. Take heed and see what can be done.
    15. Then to the youngest of the brothers they spake,
    16. Saying: O, younger brother,
    17. You will give heed and see what can be done.
    18. To the second division of heaven the messenger descended,
    19. When he cried out:
    20. It can not be, it is impossible:
    21. The little ones have not yet become a people.


3

    22. Again the people spake, saying: O, younger brothers,
    23. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    24. Take heed and see what can be done.
    25. Then to the youngest of the brothers they spake,
    26. Saying: O, younger brother,
    27. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    28. You will give heed and see what can be done.
    29. Even as these words were being spoken,
    30. The messenger descended to the third division of heaven,
    31. Where the little ones had not yet become a people.


4

    32. Verily, at that time and place,
    33. The people spake, saying: O, younger brothers, the little ones
          have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    34. Take heed and see what can be done.
    35. Then to the youngest of the brothers they spake,
    36. Saying: O, younger brother,
    37. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    38. You will give heed and see what can be done.
    39. Even as these words were being spoken,
    40. The messenger descended to the fourth division of heaven,
    41. Where lay the bird (the female eagle) that has no stains (evil
          disposition).
    42. Verily, a person who is ever present upon her nest.
    43. Upon the center of the earth, that sat in all her greatness,[2]
    44. There stood a person (the male eagle).
    45. From him we shall take the name, Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´, Earth,
    46. Verily, he is a person who travels far and wide, above the
          earth.
    47. We shall take from him the name, Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-ga-shoⁿ,
          Travels-above-the-earth.
    48. Verily, he is a person whose home is upon the center of the
          earth.
    49. We will take from him the name, Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-u-çkoⁿ-çka,
          Center-of-the-earth.

[2] The words of this line are figurative and mean the earth when she
displays her greatness by her blossoming flowers and her ripening fruit.


5

    50. The little ones are now a people.
    51. We shall also take the name, Xi-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman,
    52. Also the name, Hiⁿ´-i-ḳiⁿ-da-bi, Feathers-fought-over,
    53. Hiⁿ´-ga-moⁿ-ge, Feathers-scattered-by-the-winds, shall also be
          our name,
    54. As also, Noⁿ-be´-çi, Yellow-hands.
    55. And Wa-zhiⁿ´-ga-hiⁿ, Feathers-of-the-bird, shall be our name.


6

    56. Verily, at that time and place,
    57. The eagle spake, saying: Behold the hollow of my foot,
    58. Which I have made to be the sign of old age.
    59. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    60. They shall live to see the sign of old age in the hollow of
          their foot.

    61. The wrinkles upon my shin,
    62. I have made to be the sign of old age.
    63. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    64. They shall live to see wrinkles upon their shin.
    65. The folds of the skin on my knee,
    66. I have made to be the sign of old age.
    67. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    68. They shall live to see the skin of their knee gathered in folds.

    69. The stripes on the feathers of my thigh,
    70. I have made to be the sign of old age.
    71. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    72. They shall live to see the sign of old age upon their thigh.
    73. The stripes upon my breast,
    74. I have made to be the sign of old age.
    75. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    76. They shall live to see the sign of old age on their breast.

    77. The stripes upon the corners of my mouth,
    78. I have made to be the sign of old age.
    79. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    80. They shall live to see the sign of old age in the corners of
          their mouth.

    81. The stripes upon my forehead,
    82. I have made to be the sign of old age.
    83. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    84. They shall live to see the sign of old age on their forehead.

    85. The folds of my eyelids,
    86. I have made to be the sign of old age.
    87. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    88. They shall live to see the sign of old age on their eyelids.

    89. I have been able to bring myself to old age.
    90. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    91. They also shall be able to bring themselves to old age.
    92. I have been able to bring myself to the calm and peaceful days.
    93. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    94. They also shall be able to bring themselves to the calm and
          peaceful days, as they travel the path of life.


THE CHILD IS PASSED FROM GENS TO GENS TO BE BLESSED

At the close of the simultaneous recital of the wi´-gi-es by the
Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of the six gentes, namely, the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, Tho´-xe,
Noⁿ´-poⁿ-da, Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe, I´-ba-ṭse, and the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge,
the Sho´-ḳa carries the infant to the head of the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi gens,
who takes it in his arms, then, dipping the tips of the fingers into
a wooden vessel, in which had been put sacred water and red cedar
fronds, he gently touches with his moistened fingertips the lips, head,
arms, and body of the little one. This ceremonial act is an appeal to
Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da to grant to the little one health and strength so that it
may grow to maturity and old age without interruption by disease.

The child is next taken by the Sho´-ḳa to the head of the Noⁿ´-poⁿ-da
gens, who blesses it in the same manner with the symbolic water and
cedar fronds.

Then the little one is taken to the head of the I´-ba-ṭse gens, who
touches the lips, head, arms and body of the child with pounded corn,
besides the sacred water and cedar fronds. The touching of the child
with the life-giving corn is an act of appeal to Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da that the
child be not permitted to suffer for want of food during its life, so
that it may reach maturity and old age without difficulty. The gentile
symbol of the I´-ba-ṭse gens is the wind but it was authorized by the
Tho´-xe gens to use the corn ritual in its child-naming ritual.

The Sho´-ḳa takes the little one from the I´-ba-ṭse to the head of the
Tho´-xe, Buffalo-bull, gens. In the mythical story of the origin of the
maize it was Tho´-xe, Buffalo-bull, who gave to the people the maize
and the squash. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 279-281,
lines 54 to 110.) The head of the Tho´-xe gens takes the little one
in his arms and blesses it with the sacred water and cedar fronds as
did the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, then, mixing some of his own pounded corn with
that of the I´-ba-ṭse, he blesses the child with the sacred corn, the
life symbol of his own gens. The ceremonial act of the Tho´-xe is an
expression of the wish that the life-giving corn will aid the new
member of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens to successfully reach maturity
and old age.

The next to take the child in his arms and bless it with the symbolic
water, cedar fronds and corn is the head of the Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe, Wolf,
gens. His ceremonial acts do not differ from those of the Tho´-xe.

The Sho´-ḳa then brings the little one to its own gens, the Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-shta-ge, the People of Peace. The head of the gens takes the little
one in his arms and blesses it in the same manner in which the Tho´-xe
blessed it. This is the gens to whom the sick are brought that they
might taste of the sacred food prepared by them and be strengthened.
From this healing power the members of the gens like to take the name,
Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ, Good-doctor.

When each of these gentes had blessed the child in turn the Sho´-ḳa
brings the mother to the Xo´-ḳa, who places in her hands two little
sticks, each of which represents a sacred name of the gens of which the
little one has now become a member. The Xo´-ḳa bids her take one of the
names represented by the sticks. The mother usually takes for her child
the name that is most euphonious and which she thinks has the greater
religious significance. The selection of a name for the new member of
the gens closes the ceremony.

During the month of April, 1916, Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ was summoned to the
house of Wa-xthi´-zhi to name his grandson, whose father is a member
of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens. Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ promptly responded
to the call but Wa-xthi´-zhi became uncertain as to whether or not
the ceremonial naming of a child according to the ancient tribal
rites would come under the prohibition of the new religion which he
had accepted against the practice of the ancient Osage ceremonies.
The full ceremony was omitted, but the old man was asked to offer to
the mother the choice of two sacred names: Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´, Earth (see p.
70, line 45), and Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ, Good-doctor. The mother, a member
of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga (Puma) gens, chose for her son, a member of the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens, the name Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Although the
full child-naming ceremony was omitted, Wa-xthi´-zhi gave as fees
to Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ a horse, a blanket, and other articles of value,
amounting to about one hundred and fifty dollars.

The first wi´-gi-e recited in the child-naming ritual given by
Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ (pp. 60 to 67) is entitled Wa-zho´-i-ga-the Wi´-gi-e,
literally, The Taking of Bodies, and freely translated, The Taking of
Life Symbols. In this wi´-gi-e eight gods, in the forms of certain
cosmic bodies, are adopted as Life Symbols. Sex is attributed to
these gods and goddesses and they are addressed as “grandfather” and
“grandmother” because of their great age and mysterious character. The
wi´-gi-e is an expression by the ancient Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of their
longing desire for a tribal life that will be as lasting as that of the
gods and goddesses who forever travel in the heavens. These gods and
goddesses are paired in this wi´-gi-e as follows:

    1. Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da Hoⁿ´-ba doⁿ, God of Day (the Sun), grandfather,
    2. Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da Hoⁿ doⁿ, Goddess of Night (the Moon), grandmother.

    3. Wa´-ṭse-do-ga, Male Star (the Morning star), grandfather,
    4. Wa´-ṭse Mi-ga, Female Star (the Evening star), grandmother.

    5. Wa´-ba-ha, Litter (the Dipper), grandfather,
    6. Ṭa-p̣a´, Deer-head (the Pleiades), grandmother.

    7. Ṭa Tha´-bthiⁿ, Three-deer (the three great stars that form
         Orion’s Belt), grandfather,
    8. Mi-ḳa-ḳ’e u-ḳi-tha-ç’iⁿ (Stars-strung-together) (theta and iota
         in Orion), grandmother.

Xu´-tha-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ (Elder Ṭsi´-zhu), a war gens
of the Ṭsi´-zhu great tribal division, was asked for the Child-naming
Ritual of his gens, he being referred to as one versed in the rituals
of the Ṭsi´-zhu war gentes, but he declined to give it in full. With
some reluctance he consented to recite the first wi´-gi-e of his ritual
which corresponds to and bears the same title as the one given by
Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ, a Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.
(See pp. 60 to 67.)

[Illustration:

FIG. 3.—Chart of constellation Wa´-ba-ha (Ursa Major)]

[Illustration:

FIG. 4.—Chart of Ṭa Ṭha´-bthiⁿ, Three Deer (in Orion)]

In the Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ wi´-gi-e (The Taking of Life Symbols), the
people of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens implored four gods and four
goddesses of the sky for permission to take from them “bodies” for
their little ones. The people of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ, in the wi´-gi-e
recorded by Xu-thu´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ, entreated six gods and four goddesses
of the sky for permission to take “bodies” from them for their little
ones. The following is the order in which the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ people
approached these ten sky deities, the order in which they paired them
according to sex, and the terms of relationship they used in addressing
them:

1. Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da Hoⁿ´-ba doⁿ, the God of Day (the Sun), grandfather,
2. Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da Hoⁿ doⁿ, the Goddess of Night (the Moon), grandmother.

3. Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e Hoⁿ-baⁿ doⁿ, the Day-star (Morning star), grandfather,
4. Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e Hoⁿ´ doⁿ, the Night-star (Evening star), grandmother.

5. Wa´-ba-ha, Litter, the Dipper (Great Bear), (fig. 3), grandfather,
6. Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e u-ḳi-tha-ç’iⁿ, Double-star, grandmother.

7. Ṭa-p̣a´, Deer-head, Pleiades, grandfather,
8. Ṭa Tha´-bthiⁿ, Three-deer, the three great stars in Orion’s belt
(fig. 4), grandmother.

9. Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e Zhu-dse, Red-star, the Pole star, grandfather,
10. Shoⁿ-ge A-ga-k’e e-goⁿ, Dog-star, Sirius, grandfather.

The two wi´-gi-es do not agree as to the sexes of two of the sky
deities. In the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge wi´-gi-e, Ṭa-p̣a´ (Pleiades)
is addressed as grandmother and in that of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ as
grandfather. Ṭa-tha´-bthiⁿ, Three-deer, is addressed as grandfather in
the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge wi´-gi-e and in that of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ as
grandmother.

The difference between the two wi´-gi-es in this respect was spoken
of to Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ and he said: “We notice such mistakes in the
tribal rites but controversy over them is always avoided by the
Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga. Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ recited his wi´-gi-e correctly,
and we recite ours as it was handed down to us. The Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ,
being a war people, mention in their wi´-gi-e their two war gods, the
Red-star and the Dog-star; they address both as grandfather. We (the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge) are a peace people, therefore we do not mention
those two gods in our child-naming ritual.”


FIRST CHILD-NAMING WI´-GI-E OF THE ṬSI´-ZHU WA-NO^N GENS

The following is the first wi´-gi-e in the Child-naming Ritual of the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ, war gens, of the Ṭsi´-zhu great tribal division, as
recited by Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ.


TAKING OF LIFE SYMBOLS


1

    1. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    2. The Ṭsi´-zhu, a people who have seven fireplaces, spake to one
         another,
    3. Saying: O, younger brothers,
    4. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    5. Then, at that very time they spake
    6. To the Sho´-ḳa Wa-ba-xi (the Chief Messenger),
    7. Saying: O, younger brother,
    8. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies,
    9. Take heed and see what can be done.
    10. Then, at that very time,
    11. The Chief Messenger
    12. Hastened to the
    13. God of Day (the Sun), who sitteth in the heavens,
    14. And returned with him to the people.
    15. They spake to the God of Day, saying: O, grandfather,
    16. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    17. Then, at that very time,
    18. The God of Day quickly replied: It is well you sent for me.
    19. Of all the groups of gods,
    20. I am a god by myself.
    21. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    22. Even among the gods,
    23. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    24. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    25. Even among the gods
    26. There is not one who shall be able to see their path, in life’s
          journey.
    27. Even among the gods
    28. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    29. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    30. Even among the gods
    31. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path, in
          life’s journey.
    32. Even among the gods
    33. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    34. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    35. Even among the gods
    36. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
          prevent their going.
    37. I am not the only god,
    38. Take heed and make further search.


2

    39. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    40. The Chief Messenger
    41. Hastened to the
    42. Goddess of Night (the Moon), who sitteth in the heavens,
    43. And returned with her to the people.
    44. They spake to her, saying: O, grandmother,
    45. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    46. Then, at that very time,
    47. The Goddess of Night replied: It is well you sent for me.
    48. Of all the groups of gods,
    49. I am a god by myself.
    50. Even among the gods
    51. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    52. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    53. Even among the gods
    54. There is not one who shall be able to see their path.
    55. Even among the gods
    56. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    57. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    58. Even among the gods
    59. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path.
    60. Even among the gods
    61. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    62. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    63. Even among the gods
    64. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
          prevent their going.
    65. I am not the only god,
    66. Take heed and make further search.


3

    67. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this house,
    68. The Chief Messenger
    69. Hastened to the
    70. Star of Day (the Morning Star), who sitteth in the heavens,
    71. And returned with him to the people.
    72. They spake to the Star of Day, saying: O, grandfather,
    73. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    74. Then, at that very time,
    75. The Star of Day replied: It is well you sent for me.
    76. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    77. Of all the groups of gods,
    78. I am a god by myself.
    79. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    80. Even among the gods
    81. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    82. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    83. Even among the gods
    84. There is not one who shall be able to see their path.
    85. Even among the gods
    86. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    87. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    88. Even among the gods
    89. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path.
    90. Even among the gods
    91. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    92. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    93. Even among the gods
    94. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
          prevent their going.
    95. I am not the only god,
    96. Take heed and make further search.


4

    97. The Chief Messenger
    98. Hastened to the
    99. Star of Night (the Evening Star), who sitteth in the heavens,
    100. And returned with her to the people.
    101. They spake to her, saying: O, grandmother,
    102. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    103. Then, at that very time,
    104. The Star of Night replied: It is well you sent for me.
    105. Of all the groups of gods
    106. I am a god by myself.
    107. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    108. Even among the gods
    109. There is not one who shall be able to see their path, in their
           life’s journey.
    110. Even among the gods
    111. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    112. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    113. Even among the gods
    114. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path, in
           their life’s journey.
    115. Even among the gods
    116. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    117. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    118. Even among the gods
    119. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
           prevent their going.
    120. I am not the only god,
    121. Take heed and make further search.


5

    122. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this
           house,
    123. The Chief Messenger
    124. Hastened to the
    125. Litter (Great Bear), who stands in the midst of the heavens,
    126. And returned with him to the people.
    127. They spake to Litter, saying: O, grandfather,
    128. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    129. Then, at that very time,
    130. The Litter replied: It is well you sent for me.
    131. Of all the groups of gods,
    132. I am a god by myself.
    133. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    134. Even among the gods
    135. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    136. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    137. Even among the gods
    138. There is not one who shall be able to see their path, in their
           life’s journey.
    139. Even among the gods
    140. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    141. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    142. Even among the gods
    143. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path.
    144. Even among the gods
    145. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    146. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    147. Even among the gods
    148. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
           prevent their going.
    149. I am not the only god,
    150. Take heed and make further search.


6

    151. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this
           house,
    152. The Chief Messenger
    153. Hastened to
    154. Ṭa-p̣a´, Deer-head (Pleiades), who stands in the heavens,
    155. And returned with her to the people.
    156. They spake to her, saying: O, grandmother,
    157. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    158. Then, at that very time,
    159. Deer-head replied: It is well you sent for me.
    160. Of all the groups of gods
    161. I am a god by myself.
    162. Even among the gods
    163. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    164. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    165. Even among the gods
    166. There is not one who shall be able to see their path.
    167. Even among the gods
    168. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    169. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    170. Even among the gods
    171. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path.
    172. Even among the gods
    173. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    174. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    175. Even among the gods
    176. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
           prevent their going.
    177. I am not the only god,
    178. Take heed and make further search.


7

    179. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this
           house,
    180. The Chief Messenger
    181. Hastened to
    182. Ṭa Tha´-bthiⁿ, Three-deer (Orion’s belt), who sitteth in the
           heavens,
    183. And returned with him to the people.
    184. They spake to him, saying: O, grandfather,
    185. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    186. Then, at that very time,
    187. Three-deer replied: Of all the groups of gods,
    188. I am a god by myself.
    189. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    190. Even among the gods
    191. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    192. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    193. Even among the gods
    194. There is not one who shall be able to see their path.
    195. Even among the gods
    196. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    197. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    198. Even among the gods
    199. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path.
    200. Even among the gods
    201. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    202. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    203. Even among the gods
    204. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
           prevent their going.
    205. I am not the only god,
    206. Take heed and make further search.


8

    207. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this
           house,
    208. The Chief Messenger
    209. Hastened to
    210. Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e U-ḳi-tha-ç’iⁿ, Double-star (theta and iota in
           Orion), who sitteth in the heavens,
    211. And returned with her to the people.
    212. They spake to her, saying: O, grandmother,
    213. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    214. Then, at that very time,
    215. Double-star replied: It is well you sent for me.
    216. Of all the groups of gods
    217. I am a god by myself.
    218. Even among the gods
    219. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    220. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    221. Even among the gods
    222. There is not one who shall be able to see their path.
    223. Even among the gods
    224. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    225. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    226. Even among the gods
    227. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path.
    228. Even among the gods
    229. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    230. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    231. Even among the gods
    232. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
           prevent their going.
    233. I am not the only god,
    234. Take heed and make further search.


9

    235. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this
           house,
    236. The Chief Messenger
    237. Hastened to
    238. Mi-ḳa´-ḳ´e Zhu-dse, Red-star (Pole star), who sitteth in the
           heavens,
    239. And returned with him to the people.
    240. They spake to him, saying: O, grandfather,
    241. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    242. Red-star replied: It is well you sent for me.
    243. Of all the groups of gods
    244. I am a god by myself.
    245. The little ones shall make of me their bodies.
    246. Even among the gods
    247. There is not one who has power to see my path.
    248. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    249. Even among the gods
    250. There is not one who shall be able to see their path.
    251. Even among the gods
    252. There is not one who has power to cross my path.
    253. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    254. Even among the gods
    255. There is not one who shall be able to cross their path.
    256. Even among the gods
    257. What one is there who can stand in my way to prevent my going?
    258. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    259. Even among the gods
    260. There is not one who shall be able to stand in their way to
           prevent their going.
    261. I am not the only god,
    262. Take heed and make further search.


10

    263. Verily, at that time and place, it has been said, in this
           house,
    264. The Chief Messenger
    265. Hastened to
    266. The side of the heavens
    267. Where lay Shoⁿ´-ge, the Dog (Sirius), as though suspended in
           the sky,
    268. And returned with him to the people.
    269. They spake to him, saying: O grandfather,
    270. The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    271. Then, at that very time,
    272. The Dog replied: The little ones shall make of me their bodies,
    273. Behold my toes, that are gathered closely together,
    274. I have not folded them together without a purpose.
    275. I have made them to be a sign of old age.
    276. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    277. When they become aged men,
    278. In their toes, closely folded together,
    279. They shall see the sign of old age.
    280. Behold the folds of skin on my ankle.
    281. I have not put them there without a purpose.
    282. I have made them to be a sign of old age.
    283. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    284. When they become aged men,
    285. In the skin of their ankles, gathered in folds,
    286. They shall see the sign of old age.
    287. Behold the flaccid muscles of my thigh.
    288. They have not become flaccid without a purpose.
    289. I have made them to be a sign of old age.
    290. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    291. When they become aged men,
    292. They shall see in the flaccid muscles of their thighs the sign
           of old age.

    293. Behold my shoulders, that are drawn close together.
    294. They are not drawn together without a purpose.
    295. I have made them to be a sign of old age.
    296. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    297. When they become aged men,
    298. They shall see in their shoulders drawn together the sign of
           old age.

    299. Behold the flaccid muscles of my throat.
    300. They have not become flaccid without a purpose.
    301. I have made them to be a sign of old age.
    302. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    303. When they become aged men,
    304. They shall see in the flaccid muscles of their throat the sign
           of old age.

    305. Behold the folds of the corners of my mouth.
    306. They are not put there without a purpose.
    307. I have made them to be a sign of old age.
    308. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    309. When they become aged men,
    310. They shall see in the corners of their mouth the sign of old
           age.

    311. Behold the folds in the corners of my eyes.
    312. They are not put there without a purpose.
    313. I have made them to be a sign of old age.
    314. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    315. When they become aged men,
    316. They shall see in the corners of their eyes the sign of old
           age.

    317. Behold the tip of my nose.
    318. It is not placed there without a purpose.
    319. I have placed it there for chasing away other gods.
    320. I use it for keeping other gods from entering my house.
    321. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    322. They shall use it to chase away other gods, as they travel the
           path of life.

    323. Behold the hair on the crown of my head grown thin.
    324. It has not grown thin without a purpose.
    325. I have made it to be a sign of old age.
    326. When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    327. When they become aged men,
    328. They shall see in their whitened hair
    329. The sign of old age, as they travel the path of life.
    330. There comes a time
    331. When a calm and peaceful day comes upon me,
    332. So there shall come upon the little ones a calm and peaceful
           day, as they travel the path of life.

The most important wi´-gi-es (recited parts of a ritual) used in the
child-naming rituals are those which relate to the life symbols of a
gens, such as the sun, the moon, the morning and evening stars, night
and day, deer, elk, bear, etc., which are called wa-zho´-i-ga-the,
objects of which bodies are made; and those which relate to the
personal, sacred names adopted by a gens to be used by its members for
their children. The wi´-gi-e relating to the life symbols are usually
recited at the beginning of the ceremony. (See wi´-gi-e of the Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-shta-ge gens, p. 60.) The name wi´-gi-es, called Zha´-zhe Ḳi-ṭoⁿ
(Zha´-zhe, name; Ḳi-ṭoⁿ, the taking of), are recited when all the
Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga who were invited to take part in the ceremony of the
conferring of a name upon a child have assembled. The life-symbol and
the name-taking wi´-gi-es are paraphrases of the mythical stories of
the origin of the people of a gens. These mythical origin stories are
called Ni´-ḳi-e, freely translated, Sayings of the Ancient Men.

Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ (pl. 7), of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu
great tribal division, recorded the life symbol wi´-gi-e of his gens
(see pp. 75-84) but he declined to give the wi´-gi-e of the sacred
gens names. However, these names appear in the Wi´-gi-e Ṭoⁿ-ga, Great
Wi´-gi-e (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 254-269), which are
here given in their order, as follows:

1. ’Iⁿ-çka´, White Rock. In the origin story of this gens the people
came down from the sky, as eagles, to the earth and alighted upon seven
trees. Thence:

    36. They moved onward over the earth.
    37. They came to the top of a rocky cliff,
    38. Close to it they came and paused,
    40. They spake to one another, saying: White Rock
    41. We shall make to be a personal name for ourselves.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 255.)

2. Moⁿ´-hiⁿ Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da, Mysterious Knife. From the White Rock the
people went forth to wander over the earth. They thought to make for
themselves a knife for ceremonial use. The Sho´-ḳa went again and again
to find the right kind of stone of which to make the knife. He brought
home the red flint, the blue flint, the flint streaked with yellow, the
black flint and the white flint, one after the other, each of which was
rejected as being unfit for use by the little ones as a knife. Finally
he brought home a round-handled knife which was accepted as suitable
for the purpose. Then followed the idea of the people of making a
magical war club for ceremonial use. The Sho´-ḳa went in search for the
right kind of tree out of which to make it. He brought to the elder
brothers the hickory tree, the thick-barked hickory tree, the red oak
tree, the red wood tree, the dark wood tree, each of which was rejected
as being unsuitable for use as a club. Then he brought to them the
willow tree, a tree that never dies. This the elder brothers accepted
as eminently fitted for use as a club, and:

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 7

XU-THA´-WA-ṬO^N-I^N (ṬSI´-ZHU WA-NO^N GENS)]

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 8

STRAPS FOR TYING CAPTIVES]

    268. Their round-handled-knife
    269. They quickly took from its resting place,
    271. And spake, saying: It is a fear-inspiring knife,
    272. Verily, it is a mysterious knife.
    273. Mysterious-knife
    274. The little ones shall take as their personal name.
    276. They lifted the round-handled knife
    277. And quickly stabbed with it the body of the willow tree.
    278. Then from its wound its life-blood streamed forth.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 261.)

3. We´-thiⁿ-ça-gi, Strong-strap. With the mysterious knife the people
shaped out of the “tree-that-never-dies” a mystic club. Taking with
them the knife and the club they went in search of a buffalo and found
one. On coming in sight of the animal they brandished the magic weapon
four times in the air and the buffalo fell lifeless to the ground:

    511. The skin of the (left) hind leg
    512. They cut into a narrow strip,
    514. And said: Verily the skin stretches not,
    515. We shall make use of it as we travel the path of life.
    517. Verily, it is a strong strap,
    519. We shall consecrate it for ceremonial use,
    520. Therefore Strong-strap
    521. We shall make to be our sacred personal name.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 267-268.)

4. We´-thiⁿ-ga-xe, Strap-maker. By the cutting of the first strap out
of the skin of the left hind leg of the magically killed buffalo the
people of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens created for themselves the office of
making the straps (pl. 8) for the warriors for the tying of captives
when any are taken. As they continued to cut out the strap they said:

    523. Strap-maker, also,
    524. We shall make to be our sacred personal name.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 268.)

5. Wé-thiⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga, Slender-strap. The strap they made out of the skin
of the left hind leg of the animal was long and slender, and when they
had finished it,

    526. They said: Slender-strap, also,
    527. We shall make to be our sacred personal name.
    549. The skin of the left side
    550. They cut in a circle,
    552. And seven slender straps
    553. They made of it for the Ṭsi-zhu who possesses seven fireplaces,
    554. One for each fireplace,
    556. And they said: We shall consecrate these straps for ceremonial
           use.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 268-269.)

These seven straps cut from the left side of the buffalo were to serve
as types for similar straps to be ceremonially made for each of the
other gentes of the tribe when about to go to war, to use in tying
captives.

6. He-thi´-shi-zhe, Curved-horn. As the people saw the horns of the
buffalo they exclaimed:

    558. Behold the left horn,
    559. We shall consecrate it for ceremonial use,
    561. Therefore Curved-horn, also,
    562. We shall make to be our sacred personal name.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 269.)

7. He-thi´-zha-ge, Outspread-horns. The people noticed that the horns
of the buffalo stood wide apart and outspread and so they exclaimed:

    564. Outspread-horns, also,
    565. We shall make to be our sacred personal name.
    566. And they said, again: Behold the left horn,
    568. We consecrete it for ceremonial use.

  —(36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 269.)

Personal names relating to any of the life symbols of a gens serve to
keep the members informed of their place in the gentile and tribal
organization. For example: Men who were given such names as Ho-çoⁿ´,
White-fish; To´-ho-ho-e, Blue-fish; and Ho´-ḳi-e-çi, Wriggling-fish,
know that they are members of the Ho´-i-ni-ḳa-shi-ga, Fish-people, gens
whose life symbol is the Fish, and that the place of their gens is in
the Wa-zha´-zhe, the first of the two subdivisions of the Hoⁿ´-ga great
tribal division which symbolizes the earth. The Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision
typifies the water portion of the earth.

Those who were given such names as O´-poⁿ-ṭoⁿ-ga, Great-elk;
Moⁿ´-thiⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe, Maker-of-the-land; and Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-ga-xe, Maker
of-the-earth, know that they are members of the Elk gens whose life
symbol is the male elk (36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., p. 165, lines
274 to 354) and that the place of their gens is with the Hoⁿ´-ga, the
second of the two subdivisions of the Hoⁿ´-ga great tribal division
which symbolizes the earth. The Hoⁿ´-ga subdivision typifies the land
portion of the earth.

Men who bear the names P̣i-çi´, Acorn; U-bu´-dse, Profusion; and
Noⁿ-bu´-dse, Profusion (by the treading of the eagles on the branches
of the red oak tree) know that they are members of the Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-shta-ge (Peacemaker) gens, that the life symbol of their gens is the
red oak tree, the emblem of fruitfulness, and that the place of their
gens in the tribal organization is with the Ṭsi´-zhu, the second of
the two great tribal divisions which symbolizes the sky, including the
sun, moon and stars that move therein. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer.
Ethn., p. 281, lines 111 to 120.)

[Illustration:

FIG. 5.—Totemic cut of the Omaha boys’ hair.
No. 1 is typical of the head and tail of the elk. No. 2 symbolizes
the head, tail, and horns of the buffalo. No. 2a—the children of
this subgens and those of the Ni-ni´-ba-toⁿ subgens of other gentes
have their hair cut alike; the locks on each side of the bared crown
indicate the horns of the buffalo. No. 3 represents the line of the
buffalo’s back as seen against the sky. No. 4b stands for the head of
the bear. No. 4c figures the head, tail, and body of small birds. No.
4d, the bare head, represents the shell of the turtle; and the tufts,
the head, feet, and tail of the animal. No. 4e pictures the head,
wings, and tail of the eagle. No. 5 symbolizes the four points of
the compass connected by cross lines; the central tuft points to the
zenith. No. 6 represents the shaggy side of the wolf. No. 7 indicates
the horns and tail of the buffalo. No. 8 stands for the head and tail
of the deer. No. 9 shows the head, tail, and knobs of the growing horn
of the buffalo calf. No. 10 symbolizes reptile teeth. The children of
this gens sometimes have the hair shaved off so as to represent the
hairless body of snakes.]


THE GENTILE HAIR CUT OF CHILDREN

Another custom, akin to the taking of personal gentile names, was
originated by the ancient Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga, that of the adoption by
each of the various gentes of the tribe of a particular style of hair
cut for the young children to typify one of the life symbols of the
gens. (Fig. 5.) The style adopted by the Hoⁿ´-ga gens of the Hoⁿ´-ga
tribal subdivision for their children was that of cutting nearly all
the hair of the head close to the skin, leaving an unbroken fringe
along the entire edge. (Fig. 6.) The story of its adoption is best told
in the wi´-gi-e of the gens, a paraphrase of which is here given:


THE WI´-GI-E

    The Hoⁿ´-ga, a people who possess seven fireplaces, spake to one
      another,
    Saying: O, younger brothers,
    The little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    Then to the Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ (Winged Hoⁿ´-ga) they spake,
    Saying: O, elder brother! and stood in mute appeal.
    In quick response the Winged Hoⁿ´-ga set forth in haste
    To a deep and miry marsh,
    To the Little Rock who sitteth firmly upon the earth.
    Close to the Little Rock he stood and spake,
    Saving: O, Grandfather!
    Our little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    The Little Rock spake in quick response:
    I am a person of whom the little ones may well make their bodies.
    Thereupon the Winged Hoⁿ´-ga hastened back to his brothers to whom
      he spake,
    Saying: O, younger brothers, a Little Rock sits yonder.
    Then, with heads bent thitherward,
    The younger brothers set forth in haste
    To the Little Rock who sitteth firmly upon the earth, in the marsh.
    Around him they gathered, close to him they stood as they spake
    To the Little Rock sitting with algae floating about him, like locks
      of hair blowing in the wind. (Fig. 6.)
    O, Grandfather! they said to him,
    Our little ones have nothing of which to make their bodies.
    The Little Rock made reply:
    I am a person who is difficult to be overcome by death.
    When your little ones make of me their bodies,
    They shall always be difficult to overcome by death.
    Behold the locks that float about the edges of my head.
    When the little ones reach old age,
    Their locks shall float about the edges of their heads.
    The little ones shall always live to see their locks grown scant
      with age.
    The younger brothers spake, saying: Close to the God of Day who
      sitteth in the heavens,
    We shall place the Little Rock.[3]
    When our little ones make of the Little Rock their bodies,
    Of the God of Day also
    Our little ones shall make their bodies.
    The four days,
    The four great divisions of the days (the four stages of life),
    The little ones shall always reach and enter,
    They shall always live to see old age.

[3] The Little Rock of the marsh is spoken of as the Gentle Rock
because it is a special life symbol of the people for whom there must
always be peace and happiness. As a memorial of the finding of the
Little Rock of the marsh the members of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens in cutting the
hair of their little ones leave a fringe around the entire edge.

This style of hair cut is called ḳonⁿ´-ha-u-thi-stse (ḳoⁿ´-ha, along
the edge; u-thi-stse, a line left uncut), meaning an unbroken line of
hair left uncut along the entire edge.

[Illustration:

FIG. 6.—Symbolic hair cut of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens]

At a festival being held at the Indian village near the town of
Pawhuska, old Saucy-calf called the writer’s attention to a little boy
who was playing hide-and-seek with other youngsters and said: “Look at
the way his hair is cut (fig. 6); that is the Hoⁿ´-ga A-hiu-ṭoⁿ hair
cut. That style is called ḳoⁿ´-ha-u-thi-stse. Xu-tha´-pa, Eagle-head,
better known as Ben Wheeler, a young man who sat near us, looked up
and said: “That’s my little boy; I cut my children’s hair like that.”
Saucy-calf then explained that the act of the parents in cutting the
hair of the child in that prescribed fashion was an implied petition
to Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da to permit the little one to live to see old age without
obstruction of any kind.


HAIR CUT OF THE ṬSI´-ZHU WA-SHTA-GE GENS

[Illustration:

FIG. 7.—Symbolic hair cut of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens]

The people of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge (Peacemaker) gens, who
occupied the most important and honored place in the great tribal
division representing the sky and all that it contains, adopted the
ḳoⁿ´-ha-u-thi-stse style of hair cut for their little ones, which
varied slightly from the styles used by the Hoⁿ´-ga. In the Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-shta-ge symbolic hair cut the line of hair left uncut along the edge
is divided into little locks to typify the petals of the cone-flower,
which is the sacred flower of the gens (fig. 7).

Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ, in speaking of the symbolic hair cut of the children
of his gens, the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge, told the following mythical story
of its origin:

In the beginning the Ṭsi´-zhu people came down, in the form of eagles,
from the upper to the lower world. As they came in sight of the earth
they beheld a large red oak tree. They soared down to it and alighted
upon its topmost branches. The shock of their weight sent to the
ground a shower of acorns which scattered around the foot of the tree,
whereupon they said: We shall make of this tree our life symbol; our
little ones shall multiply in numbers like the seeds of the oak that
fall to the earth in countless numbers. The eagles that crowded upon
the top branches of the oak became a people whose thoughts dwelt upon
war, but two of the eagles found no resting place on the outspreading
branches of the great oak and were obliged to drop to the earth. One
alighted on a larger elder tree and his people became known as Ba´-po,
people of the elder tree. The other eagle alighted upon the ground in
the midst of a patch of little yellow flowers which his people made to
be their life symbol and their emblem of peace. The people cut the hair
of their children in such fashion as to make their heads resemble the
little yellow flower, the emblem of peace. (Fig. 7.) This yellow flower
is called Ba-shta´, Hair-cut. It is the _Ratibida columnaris_.

A paraphrase of the wi´-gi-e of the Xu-tha´-zhu-dse, Red Eagle, gens in
which the “little yellow flower,” the emblem of peace, is mentioned, is
here given.


PARAPHRASE OF THE WI´-GI-E OF THE RED EAGLE GENS

PEACEFUL DAY IS MY NAME

    Verily, my abode is in the days that are calm and peaceful.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies (their life),
    They shall become a people of the days that are ever serene.
    From each of the great gods,
    I verily remove all traces of anger and violence.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    They shall have power to remove from the gods
    All anger and the desire for destruction.
    From the god of the lower world (the earth);
    From the god of light who standeth in the midst of heaven;
    From the god of the upper world (the over-arching sky),
    I have power to remove all anger and violence.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    They also shall have power to remove from the gods all anger.
    When the little ones of the Wa-zha´-zhe (subdivision),
    And those of the Hoⁿ´-ga (subdivision),
    Make of me their bodies,
    They shall have power to remove from all lands,
    All anger, hatred and violence.

NO-ANGER IS ALSO MY NAME

    I am a person of whom the little ones may well make their bodies.
    My abode is in the midst of the earth’s warm, quivering air.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    They shall become a people of the earth’s quivering air.
    Verily, in the days that are gentle and peaceful,
    I make my abode.
    When the little ones make of me their bodies,
    They shall become a people of the days that are gentle and peaceful.
    Of a little yellow flower
    I have made my body.
    The little Ba-shta´, that stands amidst the winds,
    I have made to be my body.
    When the little ones make of the Ba-shta´ their bodies,
    They shall ever live together without anger, without hatred.

Ṭoⁿ-woⁿ-i´-hi-zhiⁿ-ga, Little Ṭoⁿ-woⁿ-i´-hi, in speaking to Miss
Fletcher in 1898 of the Osage gentile system, said that there are five
subgentes in the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens, namely:

1. Ṭsi´-u-çkoⁿ-çka, House in the center, meaning the Sanctuary in the
keeping of this gens which, figuratively, stands in the center of the
earth.

2. Ba´-po, Elder, or, People of the elder trees.

3. Moⁿ´-ça-hi, Arrow-tree, or, People of the arrow tree.

4. Zhoⁿ-çoⁿ´, White-tree (Sycamore), or, People of the white tree.

5. Sho´-ḳa, Messengers, or, People from whom a ceremonial messenger is
chosen for the gens. Sometimes this gens is called Ṭsi´-u-thu-ha-ge,
Last group of houses.

It is from the people of the Ṭsi´-u-çkoⁿ-çka that the hereditary chief
of the Ṭsi´-zhu great tribal division must always be chosen. The Ba´-po
subgens has the office of making the stem for the ceremonial peace pipe
of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge. The stem must always be made of the Ba´-po,
the elder tree. The people of the Arrow-tree and the Sycamore gentes
have lost the significance of their life symbols. All of these five
subgentes use the cone-flower symbolic hair cut.

There is something pathetic in the passing away of these ancient rites
and customs which the Osage Indians had treasured from the earliest
times of their tribal existence. Joe Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ, like his father,
had respect and reverence for the religious thoughts of his ancestors
which they had expressed in symbols and rituals with ceremonial forms
and handed down. Joe had two little daughters (pl. 9, _a_) upon whom
he bestowed a large share of his affections. He not only gave to
each of them a sacred name of his gens, but, from year to year, as
they approached womanhood, he cut their hair to typify the sacred
flower of peace and happiness, an act which implied a supplication to
Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da to bless each little one with a long and fruitful life. At
the last symbolic hair cut the children had reached school age and they
willingly went to the house of learning. The white children with whom
they mingled hooted and jeered at them for their strange hair cut and
made them unhappy. When they came home they told their father of their
unkind treatment at the school. The fond father quietly took a pair of
shears and cut away from each little head the symbolic locks.

Little Ṭoⁿ-woⁿ´-i-hi also stated that there was another style of
symbolic hair cut called çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe, tails worn on the head, which
belongs to the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ, the principal war gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu
great tribal division, which he described as: All of the hair of the
head cut close but leaving uncut a row of three locks, equidistant
apart, beginning at the crown of the head and ending near the edge of
the hair at the back of the head. (Fig. 8.) This style of hair cut
symbolizes all animals of the dog family, including the gray wolf, the
coyote, and the domestic dog. It also symbolizes a star called Shoⁿ´-ge
a-ga-ḳ’e e-goⁿ, Dog that lies suspended in the sky (Sirius).

The Dog Star is mentioned in the Child-naming Wi´-gi-e of the Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-noⁿ gens, bearing the title Wa-zho´-i-ga-the Wi´-gi-e, Taking of
Life Symbols, given by Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-in. (See p. 82, sec. 10 of the
wi´-gi-e.)

Little Ṭoⁿ-woⁿ´-i-hi said that the Wa-ça-be-ṭoⁿ, Black Bear gens of the
Hoⁿ´-ga great division, had a similar style of hair cut as that of the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens. Wa-xthi´-zhi said that the Puma gens also had the
same style of hair cut.

[Illustration:

FIG. 8.—Hair cut of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ and Wa-ça´-be
(Black Bear) gentes]

The symbolic hair cut of the Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens, Men of Mystery,
is: hair of the head all cut close excepting a lock left uncut on the
crown of the head (pl. 10, _a_) and a lock at the back of the head near
the edge, which does not show in the picture. The life symbol of this
gens is the hawk and the hair cut represents this raptorial bird which
was adopted by all of the gentes of both the Hoⁿ´-ga and the Ṭsi´-zhu
great tribal divisions as an emblem of courage for their warriors.

The name of the boy whose picture shows the hair cut of his gens is
Gthe-doⁿ´-çka, White-hawk (Gthe-doⁿ, hawk; çka, white). It is the
name that belongs to the second son in a family of this gens. His
father’s name is Noⁿ´-ḳa-ṭo-ho, Blue-back (Noⁿ´-ḳa, back; ṭo-ho, blue),
a name referring to the blue-backed hawk. White-hawk’s mother is
Xi-tha´-doⁿ-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman, daughter of Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ of the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

The style of symbolic hair cut adopted by the Tho´-xe gens is of the
Çiⁿ´-dse A-gthe class and is described as, hair on entire head cut
close excepting a little tuft left uncut just over the middle of the
forehead, and a fringe running across the crown of the head from one
ear to the other as shown in the picture (pl. 10, _b_); two tufts, one
on either side of the head back of the fringe, and a tuft just above
the nape of the neck, which do not show in the picture. This style of
cut represents the buffalo bull, the principal life symbol of the gens.

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 9

_a_

_b_

FOUR OSAGE CHILDREN]

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 10

_a_

_b_

CHILD’S HAIR CUT OF THE THO-XE AND NI´-ḲA WA-ḲO^N-DA-GI GENTES]

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 11

MEN, SHOWING HAIR CUT OF ADULT OSAGES]

[Illustration:

BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL REPORT PLATE 12

BONE EAR PERFORATORS AND EXPANDERS]

The two gentes, the Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi and the Tho´-xe, are closely
related, being joint custodians of the rites pertaining to war. (See
36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 64-65.) The symbolic hawks, each
of which formed the central figure in the ceremonies of the war rites,
were regarded as being in the special care of the Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi,
while all of the thirteen o-doⁿ´, military honors, to be won by each
warrior of the tribe in order to secure ceremonial rank, belonged
to the Tho´-xe. The war honor must be won in a fight by a war party
carrying a hawk, the tribal emblem of courage. The places of these two
gentes are on the Ṭsi´-zhu side of the two great tribal divisions, but
they are not of the seven fireplaces of that great division.

In the Ṭsi´-zhu Wi´-gi-e recited by Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da (36th Ann. Rept.
Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 277-285), relating to the mythical story of the
descent of the people from the upper to the lower world, these two
gentes are mentioned. A paraphrase of this part is here given:


PARAPHRASE OF WI´-GI-E RELATING TO THE NI´-ḲA WA-ḲOⁿ-DA-GI AND THE
THO´-XE GENTES

    The Messenger
    Then hastened down
    To the fourth division of the heavens,
    Close to it he stood and paused
    And lo, Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi, Man of Mysteries,
    Appeared before him.
    The Messenger turned and said to his followers: Here stands a man,
    Verily, one who inspires fear.
    I truly believe his name is, Fear-inspiring.
    The Man of Mysteries spake, saying: I am a person of whom your
      little ones may well make their bodies.
    When your little ones make of me their bodies,
    They shall be free from all causes of death.
    They shall take the name Little-hawk,
    To use as their personal name,
    Then shall they be able to live to see old age.
    Woman-hawk
    Is also a name that I have.
    Your little ones shall use it as their personal name,
    Then shall they be able to live to old age.

    The Messenger quickly passed on
    To Tho´-xe, who appeared in the form of a buffalo bull.
    Close to him the Messenger stood and spake,
    Saying: O, Grandfather!
    Then, turning toward his followers, he said: Here stands a man,
    Verily, a man who inspires fear.
    Then Tho´-xe spake, saving: I am a person of whom your little ones
      may well make their bodies.
    Thereupon he threw himself upon the earth,
    And the blazing star, a purple flower,
    Sprang up from the soil and stood, pleasing to the sense of sight.
    And Tho´-xe spake, saying: This plant shall be medicine for your
      little ones,
    It shall make their limbs to lengthen in growth,
    And they shall be able to live to see old age.
    Again Tho´-xe threw himself upon the earth
    And the poppy mallow
    Sprang from the soil and stood, beautiful, in its red blossoms.
    Then Tho´-xe spake, saying: Of this plant also,
    Your little ones shall make their bodies,
    They shall use it as medicine
    And it shall make their limbs to lengthen in growth.
    It is astringent to the taste,
    Therefore you shall name your little ones Astringent.
    When the little ones make of this plant their bodies,
    They shall be able to live to see old age.

At the time this work was begun the greater portion of the Osage
people had practically ceased to observe the ancient custom of cutting
the hair of their children in the prescribed symbolic fashion, and
those who continued the practice were reluctant to speak of it on
account of its sacred and mysterious character. For this reason it
was not possible to make an exhaustive study of the hair cut of the
various gentes of the tribe. In the days when the rite was generally
and strictly observed the girl, when she had attained the age of ten,
was permitted to let her hair grow long, and the boy was allowed to
wear his hair in the same style as that of all the grown men; that
is, all the hair of the head cut close excepting a crest beginning
at the middle of the crown and terminating with a long braided tail
called he-ga´-xa, horn, that hangs down the back of the head and on the
shoulder. (Pl. 11.) The braided tail is called “a´-çku” by the Omaha
and the Ponca Indians.

The Ponca and the Omaha, who were at one time a part of the Osage
tribe, also had the same tribal custom of ceremonially cutting the hair
of the children. The ritual used in the ceremony is a supplication to
Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da to favor the child with a long and fruitful life.

In the course of her ethnological work among the Omahas in the years
1881-83, Miss Alice C. Fletcher undertook to gather information about
the symbolic hair cut of the children of that tribe. At first she made
slow progress because the Indians were unwilling to speak of matters
that form a part of the tribal rites. One day, at the house of Xo´-ga,
the members of the family and some visitors were speaking of Miss
Fletcher’s difficulty in gathering information about the hair cut, when
the old man caught his little boy and, holding him fast between his
knees, proceeded to cut his hair. The little fellow fought manfully but
in a short time he stood with his head closely sheared, with locks left
uncut here and there. The father swung the boy to his back and as he
started to go he said: “That white woman is my friend and I am going
to help her.” He carried the child to Miss Fletcher and as he put him
down before her he said, “That’s the hair cut of our gens. (See fig.
5, No. 2.) It is the picture of a bison; you can’t see it [the bison]
but we can. You may make a sketch of it and write about it as much as
you like.” The lady looked for a moment in silence at the locks and
the little shorn head, then, with a hearty laugh and a handclap, she
snatched up paper and pencil to make a sketch of the locks and the
shorn head, to the delight of all the Indians present. Thereafter she
had no trouble in getting information about the hair cut of all the
gentes.


FONDNESS OF PERSONAL ADORNMENT

Like their relatives, the Omaha and the Ponca, the Osage people have
a fondness for personal adornment. Much paint is used in decorating
the face and body. Most of the lines and figures drawn upon the face
and body are symbolic, as, for instance, a woman paints the parting
of her hair almost daily. The red line symbolizes the path of the sun
which forever passes over the earth and gives to it vitality. It is a
sign of supplication for the continuity of life by procreation. Or, a
man of the Life-giver gens paints his face all yellow with a narrow
black line running diagonally across his face from one corner of his
forehead down to the lower jaw on the opposite side. This is the life
sign ceremonially put upon a captive when the word is passed by the
Life-giver gens that the captive shall be permitted to live. A downy
feather worn upright on the crown of the head by a man symbolizes the
sun which brings life to the earth in material form. The white shell
gorget which a man wears as a pendant on his necklace is also a symbol
of the life-giving sun.


EAR PERFORATING

Down to recent times the Osage men have been sacrificing the
shapeliness of their external ears to the gratification of their
fondness for adornment. In ordinary times, and particularly on festal
days, the Osage men weighted their ears with strings of wampum or
other ornaments made of bone or shells and silver earbobs which were
introduced by traders. The weight of the earrings and the crowding of
the holes in the ears with the rings enlarge the perforations to an
extraordinary size. (Pl. 11.) The holes, which are bored along the rim
of the pinna, were made by the same men who performed the ceremony
connected with the perforating. These men provided themselves with
perforating instruments made of sharpened bone, wooden expanders,
and little blocks of wood against which the ear is pressed when
performing the operation. (Pl. 12.) For a long time Wa´-thu-xa-ge and
Ṭsi´-zhu-zhiⁿ-ga held this office. The former died a few years ago.
Both of these men were members of the Peace gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu great
tribal division. An Osage was asked why the ears of the children were
bored and he replied that the children whose ears were bored were apt
to be better behaved than those whose ears were not perforated.




ḲI´-NO^N WI´-GI-E


1

    1. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    2. Da´-doⁿ ḳi-noⁿ gi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    3. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ṭse-ga xtsi e-thoⁿ-be hi noⁿ noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    4. Ga´ ḳi-noⁿ gi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    5. Ḳi´-noⁿ gi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    6. Ṭs’e wa-ṭse-xi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a,
         a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


2

    7. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    8. Da´-doⁿ wa-gthe gi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    9. Wa-ḳoⁿ-da ṭse-ga xtsi e-thoⁿ-be hi noⁿ bi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    10. Thi´ u-ba-he i-sdu-ge dsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    11. Wa´-gthe ṭoⁿ e-goⁿ ṭoⁿ noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    12. Ga´wa-gthe gi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    13. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    14. Zhiⁿ´-ga wa-gthe gi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    15. Wa´-gthe gi-xi-tha zhi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga.


3

    16. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    17. Da´-doⁿ we-çda-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    18. Wa´-dsu-ṭa shiⁿ-ṭo-zhiⁿ-ga kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    19. Noⁿ´-ḳa oⁿ-he i-sdu-ge dsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    20. Ga´ we-çda-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    21. We-çda-the moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    22. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga,
          e-ḳi-a bi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    23. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    24. Da´-doⁿ wa-noⁿ-p’iⁿ ṭoⁿ kshi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    25. Ṭsiu´-ge thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    26. Ga´ wa-noⁿ-p’iⁿ ṭoⁿ kshi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´,wi-çoⁿ-ga,
          e´-ḳi-a bi a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    27. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da Hoⁿ-ba doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    28. I´-tha-thu-çe ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    29. Noⁿ´-p’iⁿ ṭoⁿ kshi-the ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    30. U´-noⁿ tha bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    31. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a,
          bi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.




ṬSI TA´-P̣E WA-THO^N


    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ-stse,
    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ-stse he,
    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ-stse,
    E the he wi-ta doⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ-stse he,
    Wa-ṭse wiⁿ u-tha-ḳi-oⁿ-stse.




WI´-GI-E


1

    1. Da´-doⁿ wa-çi-thi-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    2. Wa´-ṭse do-ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    3. Ga´ wa-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    4. Wa´-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    5. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga,
         e´-ḳi-a bi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


2

    6. Da´-doⁿ wa-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    7. Wa´-ṭse mi-ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    8. Ga´ wa-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi a´, a biⁿ da ṭsi ga,
    9. Wa´-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    10. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga,
          e-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


3

    11. Da´-doⁿ wa-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    12. Wa´-ṭse do-ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    13. Ga´ wa-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    14. Wa´-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    15. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-coⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a,
          bi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


4

    16. Da´-doⁿ wa-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    17. Wa´-ṭse mi-ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    18. Ga´ wa-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    19. Wa´-çi-thu-çe moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    20. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a,
          bi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.




ZHA´-ZHE ḲI-ṬO^N WI´-GI-E


1

    1. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    2. Hoⁿ´-ga u-dse-the p̣e-thoⁿ-ba ni-ḳa-shi-ga ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    3. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    4. Zhiⁿ´-ga ni-ḳa-shi-ga bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    5. Zhiⁿ´-ga hiu-dse ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga ba thoⁿ-ta zhi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga,
         e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    6. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    7. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da gthoⁿ-the do-ba´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    8. Gi´-ḳa ṭse a, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a, bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    9. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    10. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da hoⁿ-ba doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    11. Ha´! wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    12. Zhiⁿ´-ga ni-ḳa-shi-ga bi a´, wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-a bi a´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    13. Zhiⁿ´-ga hiu-dse ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga ba thoⁿ-ṭa zhi a´,
          wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-a, bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    14. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    15. Zhiⁿ´-ga hiu-dse ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga ṭa bi e´-she doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    16. Zhiⁿ´-ga hiu-dse ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    17. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga.


2

    18. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    19. Zhiⁿ´-ga hiu-dse ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga ṭa bi e´-she doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    20. Zhiⁿ´-ga zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭse thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-a,
          bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    21. Ha´! zhiⁿ-ga e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    22. Zhiⁿ´-ga zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭse thiⁿ-ge e-she doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    23. Zhiⁿ´-ga zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ba-thoⁿ ṭa-mi kshe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    24. Mi´-wa-ga-xe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    25. Zha’-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga, e´-ṭsi-the a´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    26. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    27. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


3

    28. Da´-doⁿ zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ga noⁿ shki a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    29. Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    30. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    31. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    32. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga.


4

    33. Da´-doⁿ zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ga noⁿ shki a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    34. I´-e-çka-wa-the shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    35. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    36. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    37. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


5

    38. Da´-doⁿ zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ga noⁿ shki a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    39. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ-op-she-wiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    40. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    41. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    42. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


6

    43. Da´-doⁿ zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ga noⁿ shki a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    44. Moⁿ´-ga-xe shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    45. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    46. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    47. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


7

    48. Da´-doⁿ zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ga noⁿ shki a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    49. Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    50. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, zhiⁿ-ga´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    51. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    52. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


8

    53. Da´-doⁿ zha-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ ga noⁿ-shki a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    54. Iⁿ´-shta-sha-be shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    55. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a, zhiⁿ-ga´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    56. Zha´-zhe ḳi-ṭoⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    57. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


9

    58. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    59. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e noⁿ-zhiⁿ bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    60. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ-ṭse thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga,
          e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    61. Thu-e´ xtsi çi-thu-ça ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    62. ’Iⁿ´-xe shtoⁿ-ga thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    63. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    64. Ha´! wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    65. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ-ṭse thiⁿ-ge´ a-tha, wi-ṭsi-go-e´,
          e-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    66. Ha´! zhiⁿ-ga, e-ṭsi-the_a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    67. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ-ṭse thiⁿ-ge´ e-she doⁿ a´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    68. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha ba thoⁿ ṭa mi kshiⁿ da, a biⁿ da ṭsi
         ga,
    69. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    70. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-hu-shi-ga bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    71. U´-hu-shi-ge i-da-çi-ge oⁿ-ḳi-gtha-thiⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´,
          zhiⁿ-ga, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


10

    72. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    73. Noⁿ´ wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    74. O´-ṭoⁿ-be tha-the ṭse a, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    75. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    76. ’Iⁿ´ sho-sho-dse thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    77. He´-dsi xtsi hi noⁿ-zhiⁿ-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    78. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ-ṭse thiⁿ-ge´ a-tha, wi-ṭsi-go-e´,
          e-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    79. Ha´! zhiⁿ-ga e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    80. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ-ṭse thiⁿge´ e-she doⁿ a´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    81. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha ba thoⁿ ṭa mi kshiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    82. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    83. U´-hu-shi-ga i-da-çi-ge oⁿ-ḳi-gtha-thiⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´,
          zhiⁿ-ga, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


11

    84. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    85. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    86. Zhiⁿ´-ga noⁿ-bthe tha ba thoⁿ-ṭse thiⁿ-ge´ a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga,
          e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    87. O´-ṭoⁿ-be tha-the ṭse a, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    88. Thu-e´ xtsi çi-thu-çe the doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    89. Dse´ u-çkoⁿ-çka dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    90. Ṭse´-wa-the kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    91. E´-dsi-xtsi a-thiⁿ gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    92. The hoⁿ´, wi-zhiⁿ-the, e-a-gthi noⁿ-zhiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    93. I´-k’ u-ṭse a-ṭsi-a-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    94. Ba´-çe-ni e-goⁿ tha-dsu-zhe gtha bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    95. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    96. Zhiⁿ´-ga noⁿ-bthe tha ba thoⁿ ṭse a-ḳa´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a bi
          a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    97. Zhiⁿ´-ga noⁿ-bthe tha bi doⁿ a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    98. U´-noⁿ a bi -the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a,
          bi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


12

    99. Shi´ wiⁿ thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-a bi a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    100. O´-ṭoⁿ-be tha-the ṭse a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    101. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    102. Dse´ go-da ḳoⁿ-ha dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    103. Do´ thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    104. E´-dsi xtsi hi noⁿ-zhiⁿ-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    105. He´-dsi xtsi a-thiⁿ gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    106. Ha´! wi-zhiⁿ-the, e´ a-gthi noⁿ-zhiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    107. The hoⁿ´, wi-zhiⁿ-the, e´ a-gthi noⁿ-zhiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    108. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    109. She´ e-shnoⁿ u-tha-dse tha-thiⁿ-she a´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-a bi
           a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    110. I´-ḳ’u-tse a-ṭsi-a-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    111. Ba´-çe-ni e-goⁿ tha-dsu-zhe gtha bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    112. Zhiⁿ´-ga noⁿ-bthe the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    113. Zhiⁿ´-ga noⁿ-bthe the moⁿ-thiⁿ bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    114. U´-noⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    115. A´-dsu-ṭa i-ga-çi-ge ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
           ga.


U´-NO^N WI´-GI-E


1

    1. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    2. Hoⁿ´-ga u-dse-the p̣e-thoⁿ-ba ni-ḳa-shi-ga ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    3. Zhu´-i-ga tha bi wa-thiⁿ-ga bi a tha, e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    4. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    5. Wa´-zhiⁿ-ga wa-tha-xthi thiⁿ-ge thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    6. Ha! wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    7. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha bi wa-thiⁿ-ga bi a-tha, e´-gi-a bi a,
         a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    8. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    9. Wa´-zhiⁿ-ga wa-tha-xthi thiⁿ-ge thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    10. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    11. U´-noⁿ a bi e-toⁿ-ha i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa bi a-tha,
          e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    12. Wa-zhiⁿ-ga wa-tha-xthi thiⁿ-ge thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    13. Çi´-p̣a-hi thi-çtu-the ga ṭse shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    14. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ-he a-tha, e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    15. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    16. U´-noⁿ a bi e-ṭoⁿ-ha i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    17. Noⁿ´-xpe-hi ba-ç’iⁿ-tha ga ṭse shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    18. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ he a-tha, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    19. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    20. U´-noⁿ a bi e-ṭoⁿ-ha i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    21. Wa´-zhiⁿ-ga wa-tha-xthi thiⁿ-ge thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    22. Shi´-noⁿ-dse ba-ç´iⁿ-tha ga ṭse shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    23. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ-he a tha, e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    24. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    25. U´-noⁿ a bi e-ṭoⁿ-ha i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha,
          e´ṭsi-the a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    26. Ṭse´-wa-ṭse u-ga-wa ga thiⁿ-kshe shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    27. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ-he a-tha, e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    28. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    29. U´-noⁿ a bi e-ṭoⁿ-ha i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha,
          e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    30. Moⁿ´-ge thi-çtu-the ga ṭse shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    31. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ he a-tha, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    32. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    33. U´-noⁿ a bi e-ṭoⁿ-ha i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha,
          e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    34. A´-zhu-ga-wa ga thiⁿ-kshe shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    35. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ he a-tha, e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    36. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    37. U´-noⁿ a bi e-ṭoⁿ-ha i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha e
          ṭsi-the a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    38. A´-ba-ṭ’u-xa ga thiⁿ-kshe shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    39. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ he a-tha, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    40. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    41. A´-ba-ṭ’u-xa e-goⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha, e
          ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    42. Du´-dse u-ga-wa ga thiⁿ-kshe shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    43. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ-he a-tha, e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    44. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    45. U´-noⁿ a bi e-ṭoⁿ-ha ḳi-the i-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha,
          e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    46. Iⁿ´-shta-the-dse bi-xoⁿ ga thiⁿ-kshe shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    47. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ-he a-tha, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    48. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    49. Iⁿ´-shta-the-dse bi-xoⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-ṭhiⁿ ta i ṭse
          e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    50. Iⁿ´-shta-ha bi-xoⁿ ga ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    51. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ-he a-tha, e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    52. Zhiⁿ´-ga u-noⁿ oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    53. Iⁿ´-shta-ha bi-xoⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha, e
          ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    54. Ta´-xpi hiⁿ ça-dse ga thiⁿ-kshe shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    55. U´-noⁿ a-gi-the a-thiⁿ he a-tha, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    56. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    57. Ṭa-xpi hiⁿ ça-dse a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭse a-tha,
          e ṭsi-the a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.




WA-ZHO´-I-GA-THE WI´-GI-E


1

    1. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga-the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´,
         a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    2. Ho´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ-ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    3. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    4. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´,
         a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    5. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    6. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da hoⁿ-ba doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    7. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    8. Ha´! wi-tsu-shpa e´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    9. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga-the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´,
         a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    10. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    11. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ts’e wa-ṭse-xi wi-noⁿ bthiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    12. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    13. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da, a biⁿ da´, ṭsi ga,
    14. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    15. Be´u-zhoⁿ-ge oⁿ-thoⁿ kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    16. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    17. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    18. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


2

    19. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    20. Ho´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    21. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    22. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    23. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    24. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    25. Ho´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    26. Ga´xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    27. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da hoⁿ doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    28. I´-ḳo-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    29. Ha´! wi-tsu-shpa thoⁿ, e´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    30. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    31. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    32. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ṭs’e wa-ṭse-xi bthiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    33. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    34. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    35. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    36. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    37. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    38. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    39. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    40. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    41. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ moⁿ-zhi z-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    42. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    43. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    44. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be u-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    45. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thin he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    46. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    47. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    48. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    49. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    50. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


3

    51. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    52. U´-toⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    53. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    54. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    55. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    56. U´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga.
    57. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    58. Wa´-ṭse do-ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    59. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    60. Ha´! wi-tsu-shpa, e´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    61. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e
          a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    62. Zhiⁿ-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    63. Wa-ḳoⁿ-da ts’e wa-ṭse-xi wi-noⁿ bthiⁿ iⁿ da, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    64. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    65. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    66. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    67. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    68. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    69. Wa´-ḳon-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    70. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    71. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    72. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    73. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    74. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    75. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be u-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    76. U’-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    77. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    78. U´-noⁿ a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    79. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki i-the a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    80. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    81. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


4

    82. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    83. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e
          a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    84. Ho´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e, a-ka´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    85. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    86. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    87. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e
          a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    88. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    89. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i-doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    90. Wa´-ṭse mi-ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    91. I´-ḳo-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    92. Ha´! wi-tsu-shpa, e´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    93. Zhiⁿ´-ga shu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, i-ḳo-e, e-gi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    94. Zhiⁿ-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    95. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ts’e wa-ṭse-xi wi-noⁿ bthiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    96. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    97. Ṭs’e wa´-ṭse-xi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    98. Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    99. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    100. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    101. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    102. U-zhoⁿ-ge be u-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    103. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    104. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    105. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    106. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ hiⁿ da, a biⁿ da
           ṭsi ga,
    107. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    108. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ skhi u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


5

    109. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    110. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´ ḳi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    111. Ka´ ha-ge toⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    112. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    113. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    114. Ga´xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    115. Wa´-ba-ha ṭoⁿ noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    116. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    117. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-ṭsi-go-e, e-gi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    118. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da, a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    119. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ṭs’e wa-ṭse-xi bthiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    120. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    121. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    122. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    123. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    124. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    125. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    126. U´-shoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    127. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    128. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    129. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    130. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    131. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be u-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    132. U´-noⁿ a bi shki i-the a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    133. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    134. U´-noⁿ a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    135. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    136. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    137. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


6

    138. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    139. Ho´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    140. Ka´ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    141. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    142. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    143. Ga´xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    144. Ṭa´-p̣a thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    145. I´-ḳo-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    146. Ha´! wi-tsu-shpa thoⁿ, e´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    147. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    148. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    149. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ṭs’e wa-ṭse-xi bthiⁿ da´, ṭsi ga,
    150. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    151. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i ṭsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga.
    152. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    153. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da, a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    154. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    155. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    156. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha be zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga.
    157. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    158. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    159. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭga,
    160. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, si ṭga,
    161. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be u-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    162. U´-noⁿ a bi shki i-the a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    163. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    164. U´-noⁿ a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    165. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    166. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    167. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


7

    168. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    169. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e, a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    170. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    171. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    172. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    173. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    174. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    175. Ṭa´ tha-bthiⁿ ṭoⁿ noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    176. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    177. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-ṭsi-go-e, e-gi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    178. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da´, a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    179. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ṭs’e wa-ṭse-xi bthiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    180. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    181. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    182. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    183. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    184. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    185. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    186. U´-zhoⁿ-ga be i-kshi tha ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    187. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    188. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be u-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    189. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    190. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    191. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be u-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´ a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    192. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    193. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    194. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    195. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    196. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    197. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


8

    198. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    199. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    200. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    201. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    202. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    203. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    204. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    205. Mi´-ḳa-ḳ’e u-ḳi-tha-ç’iⁿ thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    206. I´-ḳo-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    207. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    208. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga tha ba thoⁿ ṭa ni-ḳa-shi-ga mi-kshiⁿ da´, a
           biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    209. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ṭs’e wa-ṭse-xi bthiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    210. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    211. Ṭs’e´ wa-ṭse-xi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    212. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    213. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    214. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    215. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    216. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    217. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    218. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    219. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    220. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    221. U´-zhoⁿ-ge be u-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    222. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    223. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    224. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
           ṭsi ga,
    225. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ
           da, ṭsi ga,
    226. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    227. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
           a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.




ZHA´-ZHE ḲI-ṬO^N WI´-GI-E


1

    1. Ha! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    2. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´,
         a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    3. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    4. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    5. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    6. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´,
         a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    7. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    8. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    9. Moⁿ´-xe u-ça-ḳi-ba wiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    10. E´-dsi xtsi hi noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    11. Zhiⁿ´-ga ni-ḳa-shi-ga zhi a-ka iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,


2

    12. Ha´! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    13. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    14. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha´, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    15. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    16. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    17. O´-ṭoⁿ-ba ga-xa thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    18. Moⁿ´-xe u-ca-ḳi-ba we-thoⁿ-ba kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    19. E´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    20. He´ goⁿ thoⁿ-ta zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    21. Zhiⁿ´-ga ni-ḳi-shi-ga zhi a-ka iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,


3

    22. Ha! wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    23. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-ḳi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    24. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    25. Ka´ ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    26. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    27. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    28. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    29. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    30. Moⁿ´-xe u-ça-ḳi-ba we-tha-bthiⁿ kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    31. Zhiⁿ´-ga ni-ḳa-shi-ga zhi a-ka iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


4

    32. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    33. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-e, a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    34. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    35. Ḳa´-e ha-ge ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    36. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    37. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    38. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, wi-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    39. Ga´ xtsi hi-tha i doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    40. Moⁿ´-xe u-ça-ḳi-ba we-do-ba kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    41. Wa´-zhiⁿ-ga wa-tha-xthi thiⁿ-ge kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    42. Ṭsi´-he u-gi-zhoⁿ xtsi ni-ḳa-shi-ga kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    43. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ u-ṭoⁿ-ga xtsi thiⁿ-kshe dsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    44. Ni´-ḳa-shi-ga ṭoⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    45. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    46. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ ga-shoⁿ xtsi ni-ḳa-shi-ga ṭoⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    47. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ ga-shoⁿ shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ
          da, ṭsi ga,
    48. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ u-çkoⁿ-çka xtsi ni-ḳa-shi-ga ṭoⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    49. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ u-çkoⁿ-çka shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a
          biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    50. Zhiⁿ´-ga ni-ḳa-shi-ga biⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    51. Xi-tha-da wiⁿ shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    52. Hiⁿ´-i-ḳiⁿ-da-bi shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    53. Hiⁿ´-ga-moⁿ-ge shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i ṭsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    54. Noⁿ´-be-çi shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi
          ga,
    55. Wa´-zhiⁿ-ga-hiⁿ shki zha-zhe oⁿ-ḳi-ṭoⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga.


5

    56. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    57. Çi´-p̣a-hi xthu-k’a ga ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    58. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    59. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    60. Çi´-p̣a-hi xthu-k’a a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
          da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    61. Noⁿ´-xpe-hi ha ba-ç’iⁿ-tha ga ge shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    62. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    63. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    64. Noⁿ´-xpe-hi ha ba-ç’iⁿ-tha a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa
          i tsiⁿ da, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    65. Shi´-thoⁿ-dse ba-xoⁿ ga ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    66. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    67. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    68. Shi´-thoⁿ-dse ba-xoⁿ a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
          da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    69. I´-ṭsi-hiⁿ ga-gthe-çe ga ge a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    70. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    71. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    72. I´-ṭsi-ga-gthe-çe a bi shki i-the ḳi the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    73. Moⁿ´-ge hiⁿ ga-gthe-çe ga ge shki a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    74. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    75. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    76. Moⁿ´-ge ga-gthe-çe a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
          da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    77. I´-the-dse hiⁿ ga-gthe-çe ga ge a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    78. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    79. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    80. I´-the-dse ga-gthe-çe a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
          da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    81. Pe´ hiⁿ ga-gthe-çe ga ge a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    82. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    83. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    84. Pe´ ga-gthe-çe a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    85. Iⁿ´-shta-ha bi-xoⁿ ga ge a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    86. U´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    87. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    88. Iⁿ´-shta-ha bi-xoⁿ a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
          da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    89. U´-noⁿ a bi shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da, a biⁿ da´, ṭsi
          ga,
    90. Zhiⁿ-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    91. U´-noⁿ a bi shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga.

    92. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi a-ḳi-the a-thiⁿ he iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    93. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    94. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ shki u-hi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.




WA-ZHO´-I-GA-THE WI´-GI-E


1

    1. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    2. Ṭsi´-shu u-dse-the pe-thoⁿ-ba ni-ḳa-shi-ga ba doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    3. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e´-ḳi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    4. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga-the thiⁿ-ge iⁿ da, e´-ḳi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
         ṭsi ga,
    5. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    6. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    7. Wi´-çoⁿ-ga, e´-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    8. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga-the thiⁿ-ge iⁿ da, e´-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da,
       ṭsi ga,
    9. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    10. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    11. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    12. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    13. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da Hoⁿ-ba doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe a´, b´iⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    14. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    15. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    16. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    17. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    18. She´ shoⁿ e tho, e-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    19. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-pa-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    20. Wi´noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    21. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    22. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    23. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ a-tha´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    24. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    25. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    26. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da e´ ṭsi-the
          a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    27. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    28. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    29. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    30. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    31. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be a-gi-thi-ṭa ba zhi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    32. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    33. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    34. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    35. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    36. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    37. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi´noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    38. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,


2

    39. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    40. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    41. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    42. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da Hoⁿ doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    43. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    44. I´-ḳo-e e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    45. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    46. E´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    47. She´ shoⁿ e tho, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    48. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-pa-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    49. Wi´-noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    50. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    51. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    52. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    53. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    54. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    55. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    56. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    57. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    58. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    59. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be a-gi-thi-ṭa ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    60. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    61. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    62. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    63. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    64. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    65. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    66. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,


3

    67. E´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    68. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    69. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    70. Mi´-ḳa-ḳ’e Hoⁿ-ba doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    71. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    72. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    73. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    74. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    75. She´ shoⁿ e tho e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    76. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    77. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-pa-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    78. Wi´noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    79. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho i-ga oⁿ-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga´,
    80. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    81. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a thiⁿ he noⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    82. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    83. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    84. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    85. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    86. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    87. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    88. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    89. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be a gi-thi-ṭa ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    90. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    91. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    92. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    93. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    94. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    95. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    96. Ho´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,


4

    97. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    98. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, e biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    99. Mi´-ḳa-ḳ’e Hoⁿ doⁿ thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    100. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    101. I´-ḳo-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    102. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    103. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    104. She´ shoⁿ e noⁿ, e´ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    105. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-pa-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    106. Wi´ noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    107. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    108. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    109. Ho´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da´,
          e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    110. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    111. Ho´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ta moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    112. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    113. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    114. Ho´-zhoⁿ-ge be a-gi-thi-ta ba zhi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
           da´, e´ ṭsi-the-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    115. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    116. Ho´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,

    117. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    118. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    119. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    120. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    121. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


5

    122. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    123. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    124. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    125. Wa´-ba-ha ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    126. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    127. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-a bi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    128. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    129. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    130. She´ shoⁿ e tho, e´tsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    131. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-p̣a-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    132. Wi´noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    133. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e´tsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    134. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    135. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    136. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    137. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    138. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    139. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    140. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    141. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    142. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    143. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be a-gi-thi-ta ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    144. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    145. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    146. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    147. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    148. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    149. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi´noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    150. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


6

    151. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    152. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    153. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    154. Ṭa´-p̣a ṭoⁿ noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    155. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    156. I´-ḳo-e, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    157. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    158. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    159. She´ shoⁿ e the, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    160. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-p̣a-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    161. Wi´noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    162. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    163. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    164. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    165. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    166. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    167. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    168. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    169. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    170. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    171. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be a-gi-thi-ṭa ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i ṭsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    172. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    173. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    174. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    175. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    176. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    177. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    178. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


7

    179. He-dsi xtsi a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    180. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi toⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    181. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    182. Ṭa´ Tha-bthiⁿ thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    183. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    184. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    185. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    186. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    187. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-p̣a-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    188. Wi noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    189. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    190. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    191. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    192. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    193. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    194. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    195. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    196. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    197. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    198. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    199. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be a-gi-thi-ṭa ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´-ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    200. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    201. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    202. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    203. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    204. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    205. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    206. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa thiⁿ ha, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


8

    207. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    208. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba-xi tiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    209. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    210. Mi´-ḳa-ḳ’e u-ki-tha-ç’iⁿ thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    211. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    212. I-ḳo-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    213. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    214. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    215. She´ shoⁿ e the, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    216. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-pa-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    217. Wi´noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    218. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    219. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    220. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    221. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    222. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    223. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    224. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    225. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    226. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    227. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be aⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa ba zhi ki-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    228. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    229. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    230. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    231. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    232. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    233. Wa´- ḳoⁿ-da wi noⁿ bthiⁿ mo-ⁿzhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    234. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


9

    235. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    236. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    237. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    238. Mi´-ḳa-ḳ’e zhu-dse thiⁿ-kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    239. Zho´-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    240. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    241. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e´-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    242. She´ shoⁿ e tho, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    243. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da ho-wa-ḳi-p̣a-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    244. Wi´noⁿ wa-ḳoⁿ-da bthiⁿ iⁿ da,´ a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    245. Zhiⁿ´-ga zhu-i-ga oⁿ-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e´ ṭsi-the a´, biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    246. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    247. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-thoⁿ-kshi-tha moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    248. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    249. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    250. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be i-kshi-tha ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    251. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    252. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-gi-thi-ṭa moⁿ-zhi a-thiⁿ he noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    253. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    254. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    255. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be a-gi-thi-ṭa ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    256. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e´-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    257. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be oⁿ-woⁿ-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ṭse a, hiⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    258. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    259. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da e-shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    260. O´-zhoⁿ-ge be o-noⁿ-zhiⁿ ba zhi ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    261. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da wi noⁿ bthiⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    262. O´-ṭoⁿ-be ga-xa ba thiⁿ ha, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.


10

    263. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    264. Sho´-ḳa wa-ba xi ṭoⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    265. Thu-e´ xtsi the-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    266. Moⁿ´-xe a-tha-ḳ’a-be dsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    267. Shoⁿ´-ge a-ga-ḳ’e e´-goⁿ kshe noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    268. He´-dsi xtsi zho-gthe gi-e doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    269. Wi´-ṭsi-go-e´, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    270. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga the thiⁿ-ge a-tha, e-gi-e a-ka´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    271. He´-dsi xtsi a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    272. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da,
          ṭsi ga,
    273. Çi´-pa-hi thi-çtu-be ga ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    274. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    275. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    276. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    277. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    278. Çi´-pa-hi thi-çtu-be e´noⁿ bi noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    279. I´-the ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.
    280. Hi´-ḳoⁿ ba-xoⁿ ga ge a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    281. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    282. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    283. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    284. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    285. Hi´-ḳoⁿ ba xoⁿ e´ noⁿ bi noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    286. I´-the ḳi-the ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    287. Ṭse´-wa-ṭse u-ga-wa ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    288. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    289. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    290. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    291. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    292. Ṭse´-wa-ṭse u-ga-wa a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e ṭsi the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    293. Iⁿ´-kshe-dse u-bi-çoⁿ-dse ga thi-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    294. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    295. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    296. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    297. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    298. Iⁿ´-kshe-dse u-bi-çoⁿ-dse a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
           da, e ṭsi-the a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    299. Do´-dse u-ga-wa ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    300. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    301. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da ṭsi ga,
    302. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    303. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    304. Do´-dse u-ga-wa a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    305. I´-the-dse ba-ç’iⁿ-tha ga ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    306. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    307. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    308. Zhiⁿ´ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    309. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    310. I´-the-dse ba-ç’iⁿ-tha a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da,
          e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    311. Iⁿ´-shta-the-dse-bi-xoⁿ ga ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    312. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    313. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    314. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    315. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    316. Iⁿ´-shta-the-dse bi-xoⁿ a bi i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ
           da, e´ ṭsi-the a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    317. P̣a´p̣a-çi ga-ṭse a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    318. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhi iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    319. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da i-ga-dsi-çe p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    320. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da u-ṭsi-the thiⁿ-ge a-wa-kshi-the noⁿ iⁿ da´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    321. Zhiⁿ´-ga sho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    322. Wa´-ḳoⁿ-da i-ba-çi a-thiⁿ moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da, e´ ṭsi-the a´,
          a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    323. Ṭa´-xpi hiⁿ ga-ça-dse ga thiⁿ-kshe a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    324. Wa´-thiⁿ-e-çka she-moⁿ moⁿ-zhiⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    325. O´-noⁿ p̣a-xe iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    326. Zhiⁿ´-ga zho-i-ga oⁿ-tha bi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    327. Ni´-ḳa noⁿ hi doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    328. P̣a´çka u-gthoⁿ e-goⁿ e´ noⁿ bi noⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    329. I´-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i tsiⁿ da,´ a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.

    330. Woⁿ´shki doⁿ a´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    331. Hoⁿ´-ba tha-gthiⁿ wiⁿ shki oⁿ-hi noⁿ iⁿ da´, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga,
    332. Zhiⁿ´-ga hoⁿ-ba tha-gthiⁿ wiⁿ shki i-the ḳi-the moⁿ-thiⁿ ṭa i
           tsiⁿ da, e ṭsi-the a, a biⁿ da, ṭsi ga.




NATIVE NAMES OF OSAGE FULL BLOODS (AS FAR AS COULD BE ASCERTAINED),
USED BY EACH GENS OF THE TRIBE


NAMES OF THE GENTES AND SUBGENTES

The following are the names of the gentes and subgentes of the two
great tribal divisions, in their fixed, sequential order, as given by
Shoⁿ´-toⁿ-ça-be, Black-dog, to Miss Alice C. Fletcher, in 1896. The
name Sho´-ḳa is the title of a subgens from which the principal gens
chooses a man or woman to act as official messenger at the performance
of a tribal rite. The official messenger also bears the title.


FIXED ORDER OF THE GENTES AND SUBGENTES


GENTES OF THE HO^N´-GA GREAT DIVISION


WA-ZHA´-ZHE SUBDIVISION

1. Wa-zha´-zhe-çka; White Wa-zha´-zhe. Refers to the life symbol of the
gens, the fresh water mussel, with its shell. The Sun also is a life
symbol of this gens.

    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga Ni Moⁿ-tse; Puma-in-the-Water. Sho´-ḳa.

2. Ḳe´-ḳ’iⁿ; Carrier-of-the-Turtle.

    Ba´-ḳ’a Zho-i-ga-the; Cotton-tree People. Sho´-ḳa.

3. Mi-ḳe´-the-stse-dse; Cat-tail (_Typha latifolia_).

    Ka´-xe-wa-hu-ça; Youngest brother. Sho´-ḳa.

4. Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi; Star-that-came-to-Earth.

    Xu-tha´ P̣a-çoⁿ Zho-i-ga-the; Bald Eagle People. Sho´-ḳa.

5. O-çu´-ga-xe; They-who-make-the-way-Clear.

    Moⁿ-sho-dse-moⁿ-iⁿ; Travelers-in-the-Mist. Sho´-ḳa.

6. Ṭa-tha´-xiⁿ; Deer’s-Lungs, or Ṭa-çiⁿ´-dse-çka; White-tailed-Deer.

    Wa-dsu´-ṭa-zhiⁿ-ga; Small-Animals. Sho´-ḳa.

7. Ho´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga; Fish-People.

    E-noⁿ´ Miⁿ-dse-ṭoⁿ; Sole-owner-of-the-Bow. Refers to the office
    of the gens of making the ceremonial bow and arrows that
    symbolize night and day.

8. Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi; The-Isolated-Hoⁿ´-ga. The Earth.

    Moⁿ-hiⁿ-çi; Flint-Arrow-Point. Sho´-ḳa.


HO^N´-GA SUBDIVISION

1. Wa-ça´-be-ṭoⁿ; Owners-of-the-Black-Bear.

    Wa-ça´-be-çka; The-White-Bear. Sho´-ḳa.

2. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga; Puma.

    Hiⁿ-wa´-xa-ga; Thorny-hair, Porcupine. Sho´-ḳa.

3. O´-poⁿ; Elk.

    Ṭa He Sha-be; Dark-horned Deer. Sho´-ḳa.

4. Moⁿ´-iⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe; Maker-of-the-Earth.

5. Hoⁿ-ga Gthe-zhe; The-Mottled-Sacred-One (the immature golden eagle).

6. Xu-tha; Eagle (the adult golden eagle).

7. Hoⁿ´-ga Zhiⁿ-ga; The Little-Sacred-One.

    I´-ba-ṭse Ṭa-dse; The-Gathering-of-the-Winds. Sho´-ḳa.


GENTES OF THE ṬSI´-ZHU GREAT DIVISION

1. Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ; Elder Ṭsi-zhu, or Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da Noⁿ-pa-bi;
The-God-Who-is-Feared-by-All. Refers to the life symbol of the gens,
the Sun.

    Wa-ba´-xi; The-Awakeners. Refers to the office of this subgens
    of urging the messengers to prompt action. Sho´-ḳa.

2. Çiⁿ´-dse A-gthe; Wearers-of-Symbolic-Locks.

    Shoⁿ´-ge Zho-i-ga-the; Dog-People. Refers to the life symbol of
    this subgens, the dog-star. The name Shoⁿ´-ge includes coyotes,
    gray wolves, and all other lands of dogs. Sho´-ḳa.

3. P̣e´-ṭoⁿ Ṭoⁿ-ga Zho-i-ga-the; Great-Crane-People.

    (Not sub-gens) Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge; The-Gentle-Ṭsi-zhu. Refers
    to the office of the gens of Peace-maker.

4. Ṭse-do´-ga Iⁿ-dse; Buffalo-Bull-Face-People. Closely related to the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ.

    Ṭse-a´-ḳoⁿ; corruption of Ṭse-thoⁿ-ka; Buffalo-back. Sho´-ḳa.

5. Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ Wa-noⁿ; Elder Carriers-of-the-Sun-and-Moon. Refers to the
life symbols of the gens, all the heavenly bodies.

6. Hoⁿ´ Zho-i-ga-the; Night-People. Refers to the life symbol of the
gens, the Night.

    Ṭa-p̣a´ Zho-i-ga-the; Deer-head or Pleiades People. Sho´-ḳa.

7. Ṭsi´-zhu U-thu-ha-ge; The-Last-Ṭsi´-zhu, or the last in the
sequential order of the Ṭsi´-zhu gentes.


THE ṬSI´ HA-SHI (THOSE-WHO-WERE-LAST-TO-COME)

    A. Ni´-ḳa Wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi; Men of Mystery, or Thunder People.

    Xoⁿ´-dse Wa-ṭse. Meaning uncertain; it is said that it probably
    refers to the office of keepers of all the Wa-ṭse, or war
    honors. Sho´-ḳa.

B. Tho´-xe; Buffalo-bull (archaic name for the buffalo bull). These two
gentes are joint keepers of the Hawk War-symbols.


WA´-ṬSE-ṬSI OR P̣O^N´-ḲA WA-SHTA-GE

Names ceremonially bestowed on each of the first three sons and on each
of the first three daughters born to a Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi man and his wife. As
given by Noⁿ´-xe-çka-zhi, a member of the gens:


BOYS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´ name, Wa-çi´-çta. Meaning uncertain.

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga name, Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ, Star-that-travels.

    3. Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga name, Ni-ga´-ṭo-xe, Water-splasher.


GIRLS

    1. Mi´-na name, Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa, Wet-moccasins.

    2. Wi´-he name, Wa-ṭoⁿ-i-ça-e, meaning uncertain, or
    Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-e, Sun-that-travels.

    3. A-çiⁿ´-ga name, Gia´-çoⁿ-ba, meaning uncertain.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    Ga-çka´, meaning uncertain. Son of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge and P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-zhiⁿ-ga, P̣oⁿ-ḳa Wa-shta-ge.

    Ga-çka, meaning uncertain. Son of Thoⁿ´-dse-ṭoⁿ-ga,
    Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi, and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge.

    Gi-thi-ḳoⁿ-bi, One-for-whom-they-make-way. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da
    gens of the Omaha tribe.) Husband of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi, Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge.

    Gtha-i-gthoⁿ-thiⁿ-ge, meaning uncertain. Son of
    Thoⁿ´-dse-ṭoⁿ-ga, Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-wa-ḳoⁿ-tha, Attacking-hawk. (Tho´-xe name.) Refers to
    the aggressive character of the bird. Son of Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-p̣a
    and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa, Ṭa´ I-ni-ka-shi-ga.

    Hi´-tho-ḳa-thiⁿ, Bare-legs. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the
    Omaha.) Also Ḳu-zhi´-wa-ṭse, Strikes-in-a-far-off-country. (In
    the Iⁿ-shta´-çon-da gens of the Omaha.)

    Hi´-tho-ḳa-thiⁿ or Long-bow.

    Ḳa-çi´, meaning uncertain.

    Ḳo´-zhi-çi-gthe, Tracks-far-away. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ,
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge.

    Kshoⁿ´-ga. Not name but a special kinship term for the second
    born son. Should have been named A´-be-zhiⁿ-ga, Slender-leaf,
    of the cat-tail.

    Ḳu´-zhi-çi-gthe. Husband of Zhoⁿ´-btha-çka-wiⁿ of the Hoⁿ´-ga
    U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    Moⁿ-iⁿ´-ḳa-moⁿ-iⁿ, Walks-on-the-earth. Husband of
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe gens.

    Moⁿ-ḳoⁿ´-thiⁿ, Possessor-of-medicine. (Not a Ni´-ḳi-e name.)

    Ni´-ḳa-çtu-e, Gathering-of-men. Son of Thoⁿ´-dse-ṭoⁿ-ga and
    Xu-tha-da-wiⁿ.

    Ni´-ḳa-wa-zhiⁿ-ṭoⁿ-ga, Man-of-great-courage. Refers to the
    warlike character of this gens. Husband of Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful-P̣oⁿ-ḳa. Husband of
    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Thoⁿ´-dse-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-heart. Also Wa-zhiⁿ´-wa-xa,
    Greatest-in-courage. Refers to the warlike character of this
    gens. Husband of Xu´-tha-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-p̣a, He-who-met-the-Ṭsi´-zhu. Refers to the first
    meeting of the Ṭsi´-zhu and the Wa-zha´-zhe gentes. Husband of
    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-p̣a (same as above). Husband of Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba
    of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    U-dse´-ṭa-wa-xa, Winner-of-the-race-against-the-U-dse-ṭa. (Not
    a Ni´-ḳi-e name.) Refers to a race between two bands in which a
    member of the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi gens won.

    U-thu´-ga-e, meaning uncertain. (Not Ni´-ḳi-e.)

    Wa-çi´-çta, meaning uncertain. Son of P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga and
    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ha, Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Wa´-çi-çta, Son of Wa-shka´-dse and Noⁿ-mi-tse-xi, Wa-ça´-be
    gens.

    Wa-shka´-dse, meaning uncertain. Husband of Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi of
    the Wa-ça´-be gens.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ, Good-doctor. (Wa-xthi´-zhi thinks
    that the boy’s right name is Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ.) Son of
    P̣oⁿ´-ka-wa-da-iⁿ-ga and Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba, Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-a-xe, Cries-for-a-star. Son of U-thu´-ga-e.

    Wa´-ṭse-ga-hi-ge, Star-chief. Refers to the selection of the
    chief of the Hoⁿ´-ga Great Division, from the Wa´-ṭse-ṭsi gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ, The-traveling-star. Husband of
    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ. Son of Wa-k’o´-ga-hi-ge of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ. Son of Ḳo´-zhi-çi-gthe and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ,
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ. Son of Hi´-tho-ḳa-thiⁿ. (Long-bow.)

    Wa-ṭse-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-star.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-wa-xa, Greatest-in-courage. Refers to the warlike
    character of the Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision. Husband of
    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsi-i-ṭa of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-wa-xa. Son of Moⁿ-ḳoⁿ´-a-thiⁿ.

    Xu-tha´-xtsi, Real-eagle. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha
    tribe.) Husband of Wa-ḳ’o´-ga-hi-ge of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.


FEMALE

    Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe, Footprints-in-the-woods. Refers to the deer. Wife
    of Hoⁿ´-ba-hiu of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba, meaning uncertain. Wife of U-hoⁿ´-ge-u-zhoⁿ of the
    Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe gens.

    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba. Wife of Ḳa´-wa-çi of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Gia-çoⁿ-ba. Daughter of Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-p̣a and Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba
    of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Gia-çoⁿ-ba. Mother of Mi´-hoⁿ-ga, Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da and
    Sha´-ge-wa-biⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba. Daughter of Ḳo´-zhi-çi-gthe and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba. Daughter of Wa-shka´-dse and Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba. Wife of Tho-xe-zhiⁿ-ga of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka, Wet-moccasins. Daughter of Wa-zhiⁿ´-wa-xa and
    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsiⁿ-i-ta of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Daughter of U-thu´-ga-e.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Daughter of Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-p̣a and
    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-be, of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Hoⁿ´-be-do-ka. Mother of Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, Gia´-çoⁿ-ba and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Daughter of Moⁿ-koⁿ´-a-thiⁿ.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Wife of Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Wife of Ha-xiⁿ-u´-mi-zhe of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Daughter of Wa´-ṭse-a-xe and
    Pa´-moⁿ-shi-wa-gthoⁿ of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Daughter of Ḳo´-zhi-çi-gthe and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ
    of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ka. Daughter of Wa-shka´-dse and Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi of
    the Wa´-ça´-be gens.

    Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ, Sun-that-travels. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens
    of the Omaha tribe.) Daughter of P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga and
    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Moⁿ´-zhi´-çka-ḳ’iⁿ-ga-xthi of the
    Wa-ça´-be gens.

    Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Gthe-doⁿ´-çka of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Mi´-tha-gthiⁿ, Good-sun. Daughter of Moⁿ-iⁿ´-ḳa-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Çiⁿ´-dse-a-gthe gens.

    P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-wiⁿ, P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-woman. (This woman held the office of
    Wa-dse´-pa-iⁿ, Official Crier.)

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ, meaning uncertain. Daughter of U-thu´-ga-e.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Mother of Tho´-ṭa-a-ça, Xo´-ṭa-wiⁿ and
    Xoⁿ´-dse-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Ṭse´-çe-ṭoⁿ-ga of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Wa-ḳ’o´-ga-hi-ge of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Mi´-she-tsi-e of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Wa-ni´-e-toⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Wa´-ṭse-a-xe and
    Pa´-moⁿ-shi-wa-gthoⁿ.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Ḳo´-zhi-çi-gthe and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Thoⁿ´-dse-ṭoⁿ-ga and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Wa-shka´-dse and Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e, meaning uncertain. Wife of Moⁿ´-ga-xe of the
    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e. Wife of O-pa´-sho-e of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e. Wife of I´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e. Daughter of P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga and
    Wa-xthe´-ṭhoⁿ-ba.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e. Wife of Noⁿ´-p̣o-e of the Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi
    gens.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e. Daughter of Wa´-ṭse-ga-hi-ge.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e. Wife of Ḳa´-wa-xo-dse of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e. Daughter of Wa-shka´-dse and Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Wi´-he. Not name but a special kinship term for the second
    daughter in a family. Daughter of Wa´-ṭse-ga-hi-ge.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Good-eagle-woman. Daughter of Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-pa
    and Hoⁿ´-be-do-ḳa of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.


ṬA´ I-NI-ḲA-SHI-GA

Special kinship terms and names of the first three sons and the first
three daughters in a family of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga, or Deer gens, as
given by Ṭsi-zhe´-wa-the, a member of the gens.


BOYS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´ name, Wa-zha´-zhe-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred Wa-zha´-zhe.

    2. Kshoⁿ-ga, Ṭo´-ho-ho-e, Blue-fish.

    3. Ka-zhiⁿ-ga, Ho-ḳi-gthi-çi, Wriggling-fish.


GIRLS

    1. Mi´-na name, Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi, Wa-zha´-zhe-sacred-sun.

    2. Wi-he´ name, Hoⁿ´-be-do-ḳa, Wet-moccasins.

    3. Çi´-ge name, Zhoⁿ-çi´-gthe, Footprints-in-the-woods.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    A´-ḳi-da-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-soldier. The title of a subordinate
    officer chosen from this gens to enforce the orders of the two
    hereditary chiefs. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Chi-zhe-wa-the, meaning uncertain. Husband of Ni´-ḳa-shi-ṭsi-e
    of the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Çoⁿ-dse´-ḳoⁿ-ha, Edge-of-the-forest. Refers to the habit of
    the deer in feeding along the edge of the forest. Husband of
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    E-noⁿ´-miⁿ-dse-ṭoⁿ, Sole-owner-of-the-bow. Name of the gens
    from whom a member is selected to make the bow and arrows
    symbolic of night and day, to be used at a tribal ceremony. Son
    of Ṭo´-ho-ho-e.

    E-noⁿ´-miⁿ-dse-ṭoⁿ. Son of Ho´-ḳi-e-çi and Mi´-ṭse-xi of the
    Hoⁿ´ga gens.

    E-noⁿ´-miⁿ-dse-ṭoⁿ. Son of Ṭa-he´-ga-xe and Wa-hiu´-çoⁿ-e of
    the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Ga-hi´-ge-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Standing-chief. Refers to the permanency of
    the position of the chief chosen to represent the Hoⁿ´-ga great
    division. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Ga-hi´-ge-tha-gthiⁿ, Good-chief. Refers to the duty of the
    chief to promote peace among men. Son of Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Ga-hi´-ge-zhiⁿ-ga, Young-chief. (The name appears in the
    Iⁿ-ke´-ça-be gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Ho-çoⁿ´, White-fish. Son of A´-ḳ’a-wiⁿ of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Ho´-ḳi-a-çi, Wriggling-fish. Son of Ṭo´-ho-ho-e.

    Ho´-ḳi-a-çi, Wriggling-fish. Son of Ṭa-he´-ga-xe and
    Wa-hiu´-çoⁿ-e of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Ho´-ḳi-a-çi, also Ḳo´-zhi-moⁿ-iⁿ, Wanders-far-away. Husband of
    Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Ho-xo´, Fish-scales. Son of Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Ho-xo´-e, Fish-scales. Son of Ṭo´-ho-ho-e.

    Moⁿ-kchi´-xa-bi, For-whom-arrows-are-made. Refers to the arrows
    used in the ceremony of opening the deer-hunting season. Son
    of Ga-hi´-ge-noⁿ-zhiⁿ and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Noⁿ-zhiⁿ´-wa-the, Causes-them-to-stand. Father of
    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi.

    O-hoⁿ´-bi, One-who-is-cooked. Refers to the use of the deer for
    food. Son of Doⁿ´-ba-bi of the Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    Ṭa-çiⁿ´-e, Deer’s tail.

    Ṭa-he´-ga-xe, Deer-with-branching-horns. (The name appears
    in the Iⁿ-shta´-çoⁿ-de gens of the Omaha tribe.) Husband of
    Wa-hiu-çoⁿ-e of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Ṭa-zhe´-ga, Deer’s-leg.

    Thi-hi´-bi, Scared-up. Refers to the flight of the deer from
    the hunter. Husband of Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga
    gens.

    Ṭo´-ho-ho-e, Blue-fish.

    Ṭo´-ho-ho-e. Son of Ho´-ki-e-çi and Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´-ga
    gens.

    Ṭse-do´-ha, Buffalo-hide (a Tho´-xe name); also
    Wa-zha´-noⁿ-pa-iⁿ, meaning uncertain.

    Wa-ḳ’oⁿ´-ṭsi-e, One-who-triumphs. Refers to the warlike
    character of the Wa-zha´-zhe subdivision. Husband of
    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-zha´-e-noⁿ-pa-iⁿ, meaning uncertain. Son of Ṭa-zhe´-ga.

    Wa-zha´-e-noⁿ-pa-iⁿ. Son of Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Wa-zha´-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred-Wa-zha-zhe. Son of Ṭo´-ho-ho-e.

    Wa-zha´-hoⁿ-ga. Husband of Mi´-gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ.

    Wa-zha´-hoⁿ-ga. Son of Wa-zha´-hoⁿ-ga and Mi´-gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ.

    Wa-zha-zhe, meaning uncertain. Name of the tribal subdivision
    representing the water portion of the earth. Son of Mi´-ṭse-xi
    of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.


FEMALE

    Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe, Footprints-in-the-woods. Refers to the footprints
    of deer in the woods. Wife of Ṭoⁿ´-woⁿ-ga-xe of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe. Wife of Ṭse-wa´-hiu of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe. Daughter of Chi-zhe-wa-the and Ni´-ḳa-shi-ṭsi-e
    of the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga, Young-hawk-woman. Wife of
    Gi-wa´-xthi-zhe of the Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa, Wet-moccasins. Wife of Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-pa of the
    P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa. Wife of Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga-zhiⁿ-ga of the Wa-ça´-be
    gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa. Wife of We-ṭoⁿ´-ha-iⁿ-ge of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa. Daughter of Ga-hi´-ge-noⁿ-zhiⁿ and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa. Wife of Hoⁿ´-ba-hiu of the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga
    gens.

    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa. Daughter of Ṭo´-ho-ho-e.

    Ni´-a-bi, Permitted-to-live. Refers to the fawn the hunter
    allows to escape.

    Ni´-doⁿ-be, Sees-water. Daughter of Ṭo´-ho-ho-e.

    P̣a-hiu´-gthe-çe, Spotted-hair. Mother of Andrew O-pah of the
    O´-poⁿ gens.

    P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse, Stunted-oaks. Refers to the habit of the deer
    in frequenting stunted oak bushes.

    P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse. Wife of Xu-tha´-ṭoⁿ-ga of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse. Wife of Ṭse-çiⁿ´-dse of the Tho´-xe gens.

    P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse. Wife of Ṭo´-thi-xthi-xtho-dse of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ, meaning uncertain. Wife of Wa´-ṭse-moⁿ-iⁿ of
    the P̣oⁿ-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e, meaning uncertain. Wife of Moⁿ-ga´-shu-e of the
    Tho´-xe gens.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi, Wa-zha´-sacred-sun. Daughter of
    Noⁿ-zhiⁿ´-wa-the.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of P̣a-çi´-do-ba of the Tho´-xe
    gens.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Ba´-çiu-ṭoⁿ-ga, a Kaw Indian.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Noⁿ-be´-çi of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Wa-ḳ’oⁿ´-ṭsi-e and
    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳiⁿ-da-bi of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-zha-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Chi-zhe´-wa-the and
    Ni´-ḳa-shi-ṭsi-e of the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Ga-hi´-ge-noⁿ-zhiⁿ and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´-ga
    gens.


HO´ I-NI-ḲA-SHI-GA (FISH PEOPLE)

Special kinship terms and names of the first three sons and daughters
in a Ho´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga family.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Name, Wa-zha´-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred Wa-zha´-zhe.

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. Name, Ṭo´-ho-ho, Blue-fish.

    3. Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga. Name, Ho-xo´-e, Fish scales.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Name, Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi, Wa-zha´-zhe, Sacred-sun.

    2. Wi´-he. Name, Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa, Wet-moccasins.

    3. Çi´-ge. Name, Wa-zha´-mi-ṭse-xi, Wa-zha´-zhe, Sacred-sun.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    Chi-zhe´-wa-the, Rustles-the-leaves. Refers to the rustling of
    the leaves by a deer as he feeds in the woods.

    E-noⁿ´-miⁿ-dse-ṭoⁿ, Sole-owner-of-the-bow. Refers to the office
    of this gens of making the ceremonial bow for use in a tribal
    ceremony.

    Ga-hi´-ge-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Standing-chief.

    Ga-hi´-ge-tha-gthiⁿ, Handsome-chief.

    Ga-hi´-ge-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-chief.

    Ga-hi´-ge-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-chief. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of
    the Omaha tribe.)

    Ga-hi´-ge-xtsi, Real-chief. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the
    Omaha tribe.)

    He´-çka-moⁿ-iⁿ, White-horn-walks. Refers to the buck deer with
    white horns.

    Ho-btha´-çka-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-flat-fish.

    Ho-çka´, White-fish.

    Ho-çoⁿ´, Braided-fish. Refers to the braidlike appearance of
    the scales of a fish.

    Ho-ga´-xa, fish-fins.

    Ho´-ki-e-çi, Splashing-fish. Refers to the splashing of the
    water by a fish as he plays.

    Ho-p̣a´, Fish-head.

    Ho-wa´-hi, Fish-bone.

    Ho-xiⁿ´-ha, Fish-skin.

    Iⁿ-shta´-p̣e-dse, Fire-eyes. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the
    Omaha tribe.)

    Ḳo´-zhi-moⁿ-iⁿ, Travels-in-distant-lands.

    Mi-ḳa´-xa-ge, Crying-raccoon. (In the Ṭa-p̣a´ gens of the Omaha
    tribe.)

    Miⁿ´-dse-ni-e, Fences-with-the-bow.

    Ni´-u-ba-shu-dse, Muddies-the-water. Refers to the mud stirred
    up by the fish as they move about in the bottom of a stream.

    Ṭa-he´-ga-xe, Antlered-deer. (In the Iⁿ-shta´-çoⁿ-da gens of
    the Omaha tribe.)

    Ṭa-he´-xa-ga, Rough-horned-deer.

    Ṭse-do´-ha, Buffalo-skin. (A name belonging to the Tho´-xe
    gens.)


FEMALE

    Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe, Here-are-the-footprints. Refers to the footprints
    of the deer.

    Mi´-gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ, Hawk-woman.

    Noⁿ´-ḳa-çka, White-back. Refers to the whitish color of the
    deer at certain seasons.

    Noⁿ-ṭa´-çka, White-ears. Refers to the white hair on the ears
    of the deer.

    P̣a-hiu´-gthe-zhe, Spotted-hair. Refers to the spots on the
    fawn.

    P̣a´-xpe-çoⁿ-dse, Frequenter-of-bushes.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-çi, Small animal.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. (Meaning uncertain.)


HO^N´-GA U-ṬA-NO^N-DSI

Names of the first three sons and the first three daughters.


SONS

    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Ṭa-dse´-k’u-e, Soughing-of-the-wind.

    Kshoⁿ´-ga. Ṭa-dse´-toⁿ, Owner-of-the-wind. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be
    gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi, The-solitary-Hoⁿ´-ga.

Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga. Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭsi-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Standing-house-of-the-Hoⁿ´-ga.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿ-ga, Great-Hoⁿ´-ga.

    Ṭsi´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi, Mystery-house.

    Ṭsi´-wa-the-she, Tears-down-the-house. Refers to the tearing
    down of the house of mystery after a ceremony.


DAUGHTERS

    Mi´-na. Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favored.

    Wi-he´. Xiu-tha´-doⁿ-wiⁿ, Sees-the-eagle.

    Çi´-ge. Mi´-ṭse-xi-Hoⁿ-ga, Mi´-na-hoⁿ-ga-the-favored.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    Gi-wa´-xthi-zhi, Not-stingy. Husband of Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga
    of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Hoⁿ-ga-ṭoⁿ-ga, Great-Hoⁿ´-ga. Also Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-da-ḳoⁿ,
    Light-on-the-earth-at-night. Husband of Pa´-zhi-hi of the
    Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Ḳoⁿ´-çe-hoⁿ-ga, Resembling-the-Hoⁿ´-ga. (In the
    Moⁿ´-thiⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe gens of the Omaha.) Husband of Boⁿ-giu´-da
    of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Moⁿ´-xe-a-gthe, Reaches-the-sky. Refers to the wind. Husband of
    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Noⁿ-p̣o´-e, Flames-at-every-step. Refers to the white spot on
    the throat of the black bear that is a symbol of fire. Husband
    of Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭa-dse´-k’o-e, Soughing-of-the-wind. Refers to the wind, the
    life symbol of the gens.

    Ṭa-dse´-ṭoⁿ, Owner-of-the-wind. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of
    the Omaha tribe.) Son of Ḳoⁿ´-çe-hoⁿ-ga and Boⁿ-giu´-da.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful-Hoⁿ´-ga.

    I´-hu-tha-bi, From-whom-permission-is-obtained. Refers to the
    authority vested in this gens to give the order to go to the
    buffalo chase. (Also used by the Omaha.)

    Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-çi, Fire. Refers to the fire drawn from the stone. Or
    Arrow-head.

    U-pa´-shi-e, Counsellor.

    Wa-noⁿ´-p̣a-zhi, Not-afraid. (Also used by the Omaha.)

    Wa-zhiⁿ-u-ṭsi, Courageous.


FEMALE

A´-hiu-do-ba, Four-wings.

    Doⁿ´-ba-bi, Seen-by-all. Daughter of Ḳoⁿ´-çe-hoⁿ-ga and
    Boⁿ-giu´-da of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Doⁿ-doⁿ-ba, Seen-from-time-to-time. Daughter of Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿ-ga
    and P̣a´-zhi-hi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Doⁿ´-doⁿ-ba, Mother of O-hoⁿ´-bi of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite. Daughter of Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿ-ga and
    P̣a´-zhi-hi.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi-hoⁿ-ga, Mi´-na-the-sacred-one. Daughter of
    Ḳoⁿ´-çe-hoⁿ-ga and Boⁿ-giu´-da.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi-hoⁿ-ga, Mi´-na-the-sacred-one. Wife of O´-ḳi-ça of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-wiⁿ, Star-woman. Daughter of Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿga and
    P̣a´-zhi-hi.

    Zhoⁿ´-btha-ⁿçka-wiⁿ, Flat-wood-woman. Wife of Iⁿ-shta´-gthe-çe
    of the Wa-ça´-be gens.

    Zhoⁿ´-btha-çka-wiⁿ, Daughter of Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿ-ga and P̣a´-zhi-hi.


HO^N´-GA SUBDIVISION


WA-ÇA´-BE

Special kinship terms and names of the first three sons and the first
three daughters in a family of the Wa-ça´-be or Black Bear gens as
given by Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge, Little-chief. (In the Ṭa-p̣a´
    gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. Gthe-doⁿ´-xo-dse, Gray-hawk. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da
    gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    3. Ka-ge´. Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, Mysterious-knife. Refers to the
    scalping-knife in the keeping of the Black Bear gens.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite.

    2. Wi´-he. Mi´-hoⁿ-iⁿ.

    3. Çi´-ge or A-çiⁿ´-ga. Goⁿ´-ba-kshe, Flashing-eyes. Refers to
    the flashing eyes of the black bear.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    I´-ba-zhu-ase, Red-handle. Refers to the red-handled knife that
    is in the keeping of this gens for ceremonial use.

    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-puma. Husband of Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of
    the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Iⁿ-shta´-moⁿ-çe, Flashing-eyes. Refers to the flashing eyes of
    the black bear. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ gens.

    Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-zhu-dse, Red-knife. Refers to the red-handled
    ceremonial knife. Son of Moⁿ´-zhi-çka-ḳ’iⁿ-ga-xthi and
    Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Moⁿ´-thiu-xe, Ground-cleared-of-grass. Refers to the bare
    ground around the house of the bear. Son of Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Moⁿ-çoⁿ-hoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Moⁿ´-zhi-çka-ḳ’iⁿ-ga-xthi,
    Slayer-of-the-warrior-with-white-quiver (war name). Husband of
    Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsi-çi-gthe, Tracks-on-the-prairies. Refers to the
    bear tracks seen on the prairies.

    Ni´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful-man. Also Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-wa-ḳoⁿ-da,
    Mysterious-knife. Refers to the ceremonial knife in the keeping
    of this gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-ga-wa, Radiant-star. Son of Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Moⁿ´-çoⁿ-hoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ, He-who-wins-war-honors (war name). Also
    Wa-shiⁿ´-ha. Refers to the fat on the skin of the bear. Husband
    of Mi´-çoⁿ-hoⁿ-iⁿ of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge, Young-chief. Son of I´-ba-zhu-dse.


FEMALE

    Goⁿ´-ba-kshe, The-light. Refers to the light in the eyes of the
    bear.

    Goⁿ´-ba-kshe. Daughter of Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ and Mi´-çoⁿ-hoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Mi´-çoⁿ-e’, White-sun. Wife of Wa-ṭoⁿ´-iⁿ-ḳi-the of the Tho´-xe
    gens.

    Mi´-hoⁿ-iⁿ (meaning uncertain). Daughter of
    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga-zhiⁿ-ga and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Mi´-hoⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Ni´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga.

    Mi´-hoⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ and Mi´-çoⁿ-hoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite. Daughter of
    Moⁿ´-zhi-çka-ḳ’iⁿ-ga-xthi and Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite. Daughter of
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga.

    Wa-ça´-be-wa-k’o, Black-bear-woman. Daughter of
    Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga-zhiⁿ-ga.


I^N-GTHO^N´-GA

Names of the first three sons and first three daughters.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Mi´-wa-ga-xe, Child-of-the-sun.

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. I´-e-çka-wa-the, Giver-of-speech.

    3. Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga. Moⁿ´-ga-xe, Arrow-maker.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-noⁿ. Moⁿ´-çi-tse-xi, Sacred-arrow-shaft.

    2. Wi´-he. Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ-op-she-wiⁿ,
    Woman-who-travels-over-the-earth.

    3. Çi´-ge. Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi, Beloved-child-of-the-sun.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    Iⁿ-shta´-sha-be, Dark-eyes. In the Ṭse-çiⁿ´-dse gens of the
    Omaha tribe.

    Mi-wa´-ga-xe, Child-of-the-sun. Also, Hiⁿ-wa´-xa-ga,
    Rough-hair. Husband of Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Moⁿ´-ga-xe, Arrow-maker. Husband of Wa-ṭoⁿ-i´-ça-e of the
    P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens. (Also P̣a´-xe-ga, Brown-nose. Refers
    to the brown nose of the black bear.)

    Moⁿ´-ga-xe. Son of Wa-xthi´-zhi and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, Mysterious-knife. Son of
    Wa-thu´-ṭs’a-ga-zhi and Mi´-ṭse-xi.

    Noⁿ-be´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, Mysterious hand. Mythical name, refers to
    the use of the index finger for killing animals before weapons
    were known. Also refers to the ceremony performed by a member
    of the Wa-ça´-be gens when blessing a newborn child with the
    rays of the sun. Son of Wa-thu´-ṭs’a-ga-zhi and Mi´-ṭse-xi.

    Ṭoⁿ´-dse-a-shiⁿ (meaning obscure).

    Wa-thu´-ṭs’a-ga-zhi, Never-fails (war name). The grandfather
    of the man who last bore this name never failed in his war
    exploits so the people gave him the name. Husband of Mi´-ṭse-xi
    of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Wa-xthi´-zhi, Generous (war name). A man of this gens was given
    the name because he always shared with the people the spoils
    he took in his war exploits. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.


FEMALE

    Mi´-hoⁿ-iⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Mother of Xo´-ḳa of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi, Sacred-arrowshaft. Daughter of Wa-xthi´-zhi and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Mother of I’ⁿ´-shoⁿ-ba of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi, Only-sacred-sun. Refers to the sun, a
    life symbol of this gens. Daughter of Wa-xthi´-zhi and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Noⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Wa-shka´-dse of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-wiⁿ, Star-woman. Wife of Xi-tha-u´-ga-shoⁿ of the
    Hoⁿ´-ga gens.


HO^N´-GA GTHE-ZHE

Special kinship terms and names of the first three sons and the first
three daughters in a family of the Hoⁿ´-ga Gthe-zhe, Mottled eagle,
gens, as given by Mi´-she-ṭsi-the.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Mi-she-ṭsi-the, Yonder-the-sun-passes. Also
    Hoⁿ´-ga-a-shiⁿ, same as Hoⁿ´-ga-u-ga-shoⁿ, The Hoⁿ´-ga
    Messenger.

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. Hoⁿ´-ga-a-gthiⁿ, Good-eagle. Refers to the eagle
    that is friendly to the people.

    3. Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga. A´-hiu-çka, White-wings.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite.

    2. Wi´-he. Mi´-çoⁿ-iⁿ, White-sun.

    3. A-çiⁿ´-ga. Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi, Eagle-sacred-sun. Also
    Xu-tha´-dsi-wiⁿ, Eagle-woman.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    A´-hiu-çka, White-wings.

    A´-hiu-çka. Husband of I´-ni-a-bi of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    A´-hiu-k’u-we, Holes-in-the-wings. Son of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga
    and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-a-shiⁿ, The-Hoⁿ´-ga-messenger.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-a-shiⁿ. Eugene Blaine.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-a-shiⁿ. Also Ṭa-shka´-wa.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-tha-gthiⁿ, Good-eagle.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-tha-gthiⁿ, Son of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga and
    Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-tha-gthiⁿ. Son of Xu-tha´-pa and Ṭse´-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-zhiⁿ-ga, Young-Hoⁿ´-ga. Son of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga and
    Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Kshi´-zhi, Never-reached-home. Husband of Ni´-ḳa of the
    Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Lookout, John. Husband of I´-ga-moⁿ-ge of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Lookout, William. Son of John Lookout and I´-ga-moⁿ-ge.

    Mi´-she-ṭsi-the. Son of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Mi´-she-ṭsi-the. Also Noⁿ-xu´-dse-thiⁿ-ge, No-ears. Husband of
    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ka Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Mi´-she-ṭsi-the. Husband of Wa-zha´-xa-iⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Moⁿ-shi´-ṭa-moⁿ-iⁿ, One-who-travels-above. Refers to the eagle.
    Husband of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    O-ba´-hoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ, Walking-within. Husband of P̣a´-zhi-hi of the
    Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Sha´-ge-çka, White-talons. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha
    tribe.)

    Sha´-ge-pa-hi, Sharp-talons. Son of Xu-tha´-pa and
    Ṭse´-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Tha´-bthiⁿ-wa-xthi, Slayer-of-three (War name.)

    Ṭse-hiⁿ´-tha-ge, Wearer-of-buffalo-hair-head-band. (Not gentile
    name.)

    Wa-goⁿ´-tha, meaning obscure. Also Wa-ṭse´-gi-doⁿ-a-bi,
    One-whose-trophies-are-seen (war name). Son of
    Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-tha-ṭoⁿ-ga, Great-attacker. Husband of Mi´-ṭse-xi of
    the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-soldier. (In the Iⁿ-shta´-çoⁿ-da
    gens of the Omaha tribe.) Husband of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of the
    Wa-ça´-be gens.

    Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga. Husband of Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi of the
    I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Wa-sho´-she, Valorous. Husband of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-sho´-she. Judge Lawrence.

    Wa-xoⁿ´-xoⁿ, Twinkles. Refers to the spaces in the wings of the
    eagle through which the sunlight twinkles as the bird flies.
    Son of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa-xoⁿ´-xoⁿ. James Blaine, jr.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-p̣a, Bird-head. Son of Xu-tha´-ṭoⁿ-ga and
    P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-p̣a. Son of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga and Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Xu-tha´-p̣a, Eagle-head. Husband of Ṭse´-mi-ṭse-xi of the
    Ṭse-thoⁿ´-ka gens.

    Xu-tha´-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-eagle. Husband of P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse of the
    Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Xi-tha-u´-ga-shoⁿ, Eagle-that-travels. Husband of Wa´-ṭse-wiⁿ
    of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-ça. (Meaning obscure.) Also Çoⁿ´-ṭoⁿ-ça-be,
    Black-dog. Husband of Gthe-doⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.


FEMALE

    Lookout, Nora. Daughter of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga and
    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Mi´-çe-wiⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Naranjo, a Pueblo Indian
    of Santa Clara, N. Mex.

    Mi´-çoⁿ-e, White-sun. Wife of P̣a-çi´-do-ba of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Mi´-çoⁿ-iⁿ, White-sun.

    Mi´-çoⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Ḳi-xi´-tha-ba-zhi of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi, Sacred-sun. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe-ça-be gens of the Omaha
    tribe.) Daughter of Mi´-she-ṭsi-the.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. (Daughter of Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-ça.) Wife of Hiⁿ-wa´-xa-ga
    of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga and Hoⁿ´-ga
    mi-ṭse-xi.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Xu-tha´-p̣a and Ṭse´-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Wife of Ho´-ḳi-e-çi of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Mother of Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi, Ho-xo´ and
    Wa-zha´-zhe of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Mother of Wa-zha´-noⁿ-pa-iⁿ of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhi-ga and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Wife of Wa-thu´-ṭs’a-ga-zhi of the Iⁿ-ghtoⁿ´-ga
    gens.

    Noⁿ´-k’on-çe-wiⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Kate Whitehorn.

    P̣a´-zhi-hi. Reddish-head. Refers to the reddish color of the
    head of the eagle. Mary Cox.

    P̣a´-zhi-hi. Grace Entokah.

    P̣a´-zhi-hi. Prudie Martin.

    P̣a´-zhi-hi. Daughter of Mi´-she-ṭsi-e and Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ.

    P̣a´-zhi-hi. Wife of O-ba´-hoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ (Ni-ḳa´-ça-e).

    P̣a´-zhi-hi. Daughter of Xu-tha´-ṭoⁿ-ga and P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse.

    P̣a´-zhi-hi. Wife of Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-da-ḳoⁿ of the Hoⁿ´-ga
    U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    Xu´-tha-dsi-wiⁿ, Eagle-woman. Wife of Ṭsi-zhu-zhiⁿ-ga of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi, Eagle-sacred-sun. Daughter of
    Mi´-she-ṭsi-the.

    Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Wa-sho´-she and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Noⁿ-ba´-moⁿ-thiⁿ of the Tho´-xe
    gens.

    Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Wa´-thu-xa-ge of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge.

    Xu-tha´-wiⁿ, Eagle-woman. Daughter of Mi´-she-ṭsi-e and
    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ.

    Xu´-tha-wiⁿ. Wife of Xoⁿ´-dse-u-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Hoⁿ´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.


HO^N´-GA U-THU-HA-GE

Special kinship terms and names of the first three sons and the first
three daughters in a family of the Hoⁿ´-ga U-thu-ha-ge (Last in the
Hoⁿ´-ga order) gens as given by Wa´-noⁿ-she-zhiⁿ-ga.


SONS

    Iⁿgthoⁿ´. Xu-tha´-ha-hi-ge, Eagle-chief.

    Kshoⁿ´-ga. Ṭse´-ga-moⁿ-iⁿ, Goes-in-new-plumage. Refers to the
    young eagle.

    Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga. Iⁿ´-be-çka, White-tail. Refers to the tail of the
    mature golden eagle whose white tail feathers are tipped with
    black.


DAUGHTERS

    Mi´-na. Mi-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite.

    Wi´-he. Mi´-çoⁿ-e, White-sun.

    Çi´-ge. Mi´-ṭse-xi-oⁿ-ba. (Meaning obscure.)


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    A-hiⁿ´-u-ḳ’u-dse, Holes-in-the-wings. Refers to the spaces in
    the wings of the eagle.

    Çka´-gthe, White-plumes. Refers to the three downy feathers
    taken from under the tail of the eagle and worn as life symbols
    by priests.

    He-ba´-ḳu-ge, Blunt-horns. Name given in compliment to this
    gens by the Tho´-xe gens.

    Hiu´-ça-da-zhiⁿ-ga, Young-hiu´-ça-da. Refers to the eagle’s leg
    attached to the hanging strap of the wa-xo´-be or shrine.

    Hoⁿ´-ga, The-consecrated-one. Name of the gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-gthe-zhe, Mottled-eagle. Refers to the immature golden
    eagle that is dark in plumage. This bird is regarded as sacred
    by many of the Indian tribes.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭoⁿ-ga, Great-eagle.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ṭsi-e-da, House-of-the-Hoⁿ´-ga. Refers to the House of
    Mystery that is in the keeping of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Kshi´-zhi-wa-ga-xe, Causes them to fail to reach home. Refers
    to the attack of the eagle on its prey.

    Moⁿ´-çe, Metal. Wa-noⁿ-she-zhiⁿ-ga could not explain the
    meaning of this name.

    Moⁿ´-da-i-he. (Meaning obscure.)

    Moⁿ-iⁿ´-zhi, Does-not-walk. Refers to the eagle.

    Moⁿ´-shi-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ, One-who-moves-above. Refers to the eagle.
    (In the Iⁿ-shta´-çoⁿ-da gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Moⁿ-shi´-ṭa-moⁿ-iⁿ, Moves-on-high. Refers to the eagle.

    Moⁿ´-shoⁿ-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred-plume. Refers to the eagle plumes worn
    by priests.

    Noⁿ-be´-çi, Yellow-hands. Refers to the yellow feet of the
    eagle.

    P̣a-hiu´-ga-zhoⁿ, Hairy-head. Name given by the Tho´-xe gens to
    the Hoⁿ´-ga U-thu-ha-ge gens.

    Sha´-ge-çka, White-talons. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha
    tribe.)

    Sha´-ge-p̣a-hi, Sharp-talons. Refers to the sharp talons of the
    eagle.

    Shoⁿ´-ṭoⁿ-ça-be, Black-dog. Thu-ts’a´-ga-bi.

    Thu-ṭs’a´-ga-bi, Hard-to-catch. Refers to the wariness of the
    eagle.

    Ṭsi-do´-ba, Four-lodges. A valor name. A war party attacked
    four lodges and killed all the inhabitants. The commander was
    given the name by the people.

    U-ga´-çiⁿ-dse, Breeze. Refers to the wind stirred by the eagle
    when flying.

    U-ga´-shoⁿ, The wanderer. Refers to the office of messenger of
    this gens.

    U-thiⁿ´-ge-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Stands-holding. Refers to the hold of the
    eagle on its prey.

    U-thi´-shoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ, Moves-in-a-circle. Refers to the soaring of
    the eagle. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-tha-ṭoⁿ-ga, Great-attacker. Refers to the attack of the
    eagle on its prey.

    Wa-sho´-she, Brave. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the Omaha
    tribe.)

    Wa-xoⁿ´-xoⁿ, The-shining-one. Refers to the shining of the
    wings of the eagle.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-i-çi-wa-the, Hated-bird. Refers to the fear of the
    eagle by other birds.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-p̣a, Bird-head. Refers to the head of the eagle.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-zhi-e, Red-bird. (Red eagle.)

    Xi-tha-u´-ga-shoⁿ, The-traveling-eagle. Refers to the tireless
    soaring of the eagle.

    Xoⁿ-xoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Shines-as-he-moves. Refers to the reflection
    of the sun on the outspread wings of the eagle.

    Xu-tha´-ni-ḳa, Eagle-man. (In the Ṭa´-p̣a gens of the Omaha
    tribe.)

    Xu-tha´-p̣a, Eagle-head.

    Xu-tha´-sha-be, Dark-colored-eagle.

    Xu-tha´-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-eagle.

    Xu-tha´-ṭs’a-ge, Aged-eagle. The eagle is a symbol of old age.
    (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Xu-tha´-wa-shu-she, Brave-eagle.

    Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-ça. (Meaning obscure.)

    Zhoⁿ´-noⁿ-çu-ge, Bends-the-tree-top. Refers to the bending of
    the treetop by the weight of the eagle as he alights.


FEMALE

    Hiⁿ´-ga-moⁿ-ge, Feathers-blown-by-the-wind. Refers to the
    dropping of the downy feathers as the eagle rises to fly.

    Mi´-çoⁿ-e, White-sun.

    Noⁿ´-ḳoⁿ-çe-wiⁿ. (Meaning obscure.)

    P̣a´-çi-hi, Brown-head. Refers to the brown head of the eagle.

    Xu-tha´-mi, Eagle-woman.

    Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi, Sacred-eagle-woman.

    Xu-tha´-ṭsa-wiⁿ, Eagle-woman.


O’-PO^N (ELK) GENS


MALE

    He´-çoⁿ-hoⁿ, White-horns. Son of Moⁿ´-ge-ça-be and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-ça. (Meaning obscure.)

    Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-ça. Son of Ḳi´-moⁿ-hoⁿ and Tho´-ṭa-a-ça.

    Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-ça, also Mi-xo´-zhiⁿ-ga. (Not Ni´-ḳi-e.) Husband of
    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-ça. Son of Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-ça and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    I´-e-çka-wa-the, Giver-of-speech. (A name of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga
    gens.)

    Ḳi´-moⁿ-hoⁿ, Against-the-wind. Refers to the habit of the
    elk of facing the wind when feeding. (In the We´-zhiⁿ-shte
    gens of the Omaha tribe.) Husband of Tho´-ṭa-a-ça of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Moⁿ´-ge-ça-be, Black-breast. Refers to the black hair on the
    breast of the elk. (In the We´-zhiⁿ-shte gens of the Omaha
    tribe.) Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Moⁿ-iⁿ´-ḳa-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-clay. Refers to the four different
    colored clays given by the crawfish to the people for
    ceremonial use. (See section 25 of the Ni´-ḳi-e ritual, 36th
    Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn.) Son of Ḳi-moⁿ-hoⁿ and Tho´-ṭa-a-ça.

    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-ga-xe, Earth-maker. From the mythical story of the
    elk separating the waters from the earth, making it habitable
    for the people. (See pp. 165 to 169, 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer.
    Ethn.) Son of Ḳi´-moⁿ-hoⁿ and Tho´-ṭa-a-ça.

    O-pa´, Andrew. Son of P̣a-hiu´-gthe-zhe of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.


FEMALE

    Gthoⁿ-zhoⁿ´-ba. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Xo´-ḳa of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ, Eagle-woman.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ. Daughter of Moⁿ´-ge-ça-be and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ḳi´-moⁿ-hoⁿ and Tho´-ṭa-a-ça.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ. Wife of Noⁿ´-pe-wa-the of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi
    gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ. Wife of Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Moⁿ´-çoⁿ-hoⁿ-iⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Daughter of Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-ça and
    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Moⁿ´-çoⁿ-hoⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Wa-ṭse´-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Wa-ça´-be gens.

    Moⁿ´-ça-hoⁿ-e. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Edward Bigheart of
    the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite. Wife of Wa-ḳoⁿ´-tha-ṭoⁿ-ga.

    P̣a´-moⁿ-shi-wa-gthoⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Wa´-ṭse-a-xe
    of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Tho´-ha-wa. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of P̣i´-zhi-ṭoⁿ-ga of the
    Tho´-xe gens.


I´-BA-ṬSE (WIND) GENS


MALE

    A´-ḳ’a, South-wind. Refers to the wind, the life symbol of the
    gens. Son of Ḳa´-wa-xo-dse and Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e.

    A´-ḳ’a-hiu-e, Wind-is-from-the-south. Son of Ḳa´-wa-çi and
    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    Ga-hi´-gthoⁿ-iⁿ-ge. (Meaning obscure.) Son of Hoⁿ´-ga.

    Hiⁿ-sha´-a-xthi, Slayer-of-a-Caddo. Also Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge,
    Young-chief. This name may be used by permission to honor a
    child. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ.

    Hoⁿ´-ga, The-sacred-one. A special name for the dark-plumaged
    immature golden eagle, the life symbol of this gens. Hoⁿ´-ga is
    also the name of the subdivision of the tribe representing the
    dry land of the earth. Son of Ḳa´-wa-çi.

    Hoⁿ´-ga. Son of Hoⁿ´-ga.

    Hoⁿ´-ga. (Alfred McKinley.)

    I´-bi-çoⁿ-dse. (Meaning obscure.)

    Ḳa´-wa-çi, Yellow-horse. (Not Ni´-ḳi-e.) Husband of Gia´-çoⁿ-ba
    of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ḳa´-wa-xo-dse, Roan-horse. (Not Ni´-ḳi-e.) Also Çe´-çe-moⁿ-iⁿ,
    Trots-as-he-travels. Refers to the restless movements of the
    elk. The I´-ba-ṭse is a subgens of the Elk and has the right to
    take names relating to that animal. Husband of Wa-ṭoⁿ-i´-ça-e
    of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Shoⁿ´-ge-ṭsi-e, Dog-passing-by.

    Ṭa´-dse-hiu-e, The-coming-wind. Son of Ḳa´-wa-xo-dse and
    Wa-ṭoⁿ-i´-ça-e.

    Tha-çiu´-e, Whistle. Refers to the whistle which this gens
    was permitted to consecrate and use as a wa-xo´-be in honor
    of a member who had won an important victory in battle. The
    name is not classed as Ni´-ḳi-e, that is, it was not one
    that was accepted as a gentile name by common consent of the
    Noⁿ´-hoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga. The whistle wa-xo´-be is now in the United
    States National Museum (No. 276133). Husband of Mi´-ṭse-xi of
    the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Tha-çiu´-e. Son of Ḳa´-wa-xo-dse and Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e of the
    P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-gthe-zhe, Speckled-eagle. The speckled eagle is an
    immature golden eagle whose tail feathers are speckled.
    The bird is one of the life symbols of this gens. Son of
    Hiⁿ-sha´-a-xthi and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Xu-tha´-gthe-zhe. Son of Wa-ça´-be-wiⁿ of the Hoⁿ´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Xu-tha´-k’iⁿ, Eagle-carrier. (Don Dickinson.)


FEMALE

    A´-ḳ’a-mi-ṭse-xi, South-wind-Mi-na-the-favored. Daughter of
    Ḳa´-wa-xo-dse and Wa-ṭoⁿ-i´-ça-e.

    A´-ḳ’a-wiⁿ, South-wind-woman. (In the Hoⁿ´-ga gens of the Omaha
    tribe.) Daughter of Hiⁿ-sha´-a-xthi and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    A´-ḳ’a-wiⁿ. Wife of Ṭa-he´-ga-xe of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi, Hoⁿ´-ga-Mi-na-the-favored. Daughter of
    Ḳa´-wa-çi and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Ḳa´-wa-çi and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Hiⁿ-sha´-a-xthi and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi. (Ethel Brant.)

    Hoⁿ´-ga-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Wa-noⁿ´-she-zhiⁿ-ga of the Hoⁿ´-ga
    gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ, Eagle-woman.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ. Wife of Xu-tha´-zhu-dse of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ḳa, Forked-tail-kite.

    Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ḳa. Wife of Ni´-wa-the of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ḳa-wiⁿ, Forked-tail-kite-woman. Daughter of Hoⁿ´-ga.

    Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ḳa-wiⁿ. Wife of Ga-hi´-ge-ṭoⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ḳa-wiⁿ. (Sylvia Wood.)

    Wa-hiu´-çoⁿ-iⁿ, White-bones-woman. Refers, probably, to the
    story that at the beginning this gens controlled the winds,
    and by their use destroyed all animals, leaving their bones to
    whiten on the ground around the village.

    Wa-hiu´-çoⁿ-iⁿ. Daughter of Ḳa´-wa-xo-dse and Wa-ṭoⁿ-i´-ça-e.

    Wa-hiu´-çoⁿ-iⁿ. Wife of Ṭa-he-ga-xe of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga
    gens.


ṬSI´-ZHU DIVISION


ṬSI´-ZHU WA-NO^N GENS


MALE

    Çoⁿ-dse-u´-gthiⁿ, Dweller-in-upland-forest. (Not Ni´-ḳi-e.)
    Also We´-thiⁿ-ga-xe, Maker-of-straps. Refers to the office of
    this gens of ceremonially making the captive straps for the
    warriors of a war party. Husband of Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-dsi-i-ṭa of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ga-hi´-ga-zhi, Not-a-chief. A chief could not be chosen from
    this gens because its office has to do with war. Son of
    Mi´-ṭse-xi-hoⁿ-ga, wife of O-ḳi´-ça.

    Ho´-ça-zhiⁿ-e, Young-strong-voice. (Married to a white woman.)

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi, He-who-is-called-Hoⁿ´-ga.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi. Also Wa-xthi´, Stingy.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi. Son of P̣a´-zhi-hi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    I’ⁿ´-do-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful-wet-stone.

    Moⁿ´-hiⁿ-çpe-we-ṭsiⁿ, Battle-ax.

    Moⁿ-iⁿ´-ḳa-u-ga-hni. (Meaning obscure.) Son of O´-tha-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ
    and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Ni´-ḳa-i-çi-wa-the, Hated-man. Refers to the aggressive
    character of this gens. Husband of Ḳi´-o of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Noⁿ-ba´-k’iu-e. (Meaning obscure.) Son of O´-tha-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Moⁿ-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Noⁿ-xthoⁿ´-zhe, Tramples-the-grass. Refers to the discovery
    of the tracks of buffalo by an official runner. Son of
    I’ⁿ´-do-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga.

    O-ça´-ḳi-e. (Meaning obscure.)

    O´-tha-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ, The-follower. Husband of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    P̣a´-thiⁿ-wa-we-xta, Annoyer-of-the-enemy. (War name.) Husband
    of Gthe-doⁿ-mi-ṭse-xi of the Ni-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Sha´-ge-wa-biⁿ, Bloody-hands. Refers to the butchering of the
    buffalo, parts of which were dedicated to ceremonial use in
    the war rites. (See pp. 264 to 582, 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer.
    Ethn.) Son of Gia´-çoⁿ-ba of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭse-wa´-hiu, Buffalo-bones. Husband of Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Wa-doⁿ. (Meaning obscure.)

    Wa´-i-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Stands-over-them. (In the Iⁿ-gthe´-zhi-de gens
    of the Omaha tribe.)

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ, Good-doctor. Son of O´-tha-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa´-ṭse-goⁿ-tha. (Meaning obscure.) Wa-xthi´-zhi says that the
    real name of this man is Mi´-ga-xe, Sun-maker.

    Wa-zha´-a-ḳi-p̣a, Met-the-Wa-zha´-zhe. Refers to the first
    meeting of the Ṭsi´-zhu division with the Wa-zha´-zhe.

    We´-ṭsiⁿ, War-club. Refers to the ceremonial war-club made by
    this gens. (See 36th Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 442-445.)
    Son of Iⁿ´-do-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga.

    Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, Mysterious-eagle. Son of Gia´-çoⁿ-ba of the
    P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Son of Ṭse-wa´-hiu and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Husband of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of the Wa-ça´-be
    gens.

    Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Son of O´-tha-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Son of Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ and Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi.

    Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ, Eagle-plainly-seen.

    Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Little-playful-one.


FEMALE

    Do-ra Strike-ax. Daughter of Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga.

    Lucy Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi. Daughter of Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi or Wa-xthi´.

    Mi´-gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ, Sun-hawk-woman. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of
    the Omaha tribe.)

    Mi´-gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ṭse-wa´-hiu and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    Mi´-gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ. Daughter of Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga.

    Mi´-gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ. Daughter of O´-tha-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Mi´-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred-sun. (Also used by the Omaha tribe.)
    Daughter of Gia-çoⁿ-ba of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Mi´-hoⁿ-ga. Wife of Do´-ba-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Grace Miller. Daughter of Ho´-ça-zhiⁿ-e.

    Moⁿ´-bthoⁿ-ba, Corn-hill.

    Moⁿ´-bthoⁿ-ba. Wife of Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e-zhiⁿ-ga of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Moⁿ´-bthoⁿ-ba. Daughter of Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ and Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi.

    Wa-ḳ’o´-ga-hi-ge, Woman-chief. (Not Ni´-ḳi-e.) Daughter of
    Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga.

    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Daughter of
    Çoⁿ-dse-u´-gthiⁿ and Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsi-i-ṭa.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be, God-who-appears. Refers to the rising
    sun.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be. Wife of Moⁿ´-xe-a-gthe of the Hoⁿ´-ga
    U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    Wa-ḳon´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be. Wife of Wa-thi´-gthoⁿ-thiⁿ-ge of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be. Wife of Mi-hi-the of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba, Two-standards. Wife of Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga
    of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ gens.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. Wife of Ni´-ḳa-wa-zhiⁿ-ṭoⁿ-ga of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. Wife of Ṭsi´-zhu-a-ḳi-p̣a of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. Wife of P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. Daughter of Ṭse-wa´-hiu and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. (Annie Kinney.)

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. Daughter of Hoⁿ´-ga-ga-bi or Wa-xthi´.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba. Daughter of O´-tha-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa-xthe´-xtho-xtho-wiⁿ, Standard-woman.

    Wa-zha´-mi-ṭse-xi, Wa-zha´-zhe-Mi-na-the-favorite. Daughter of
    Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Wa-zha´-zhe-wiⁿ, Wa-zha-zhe-woman. Daughter of
    Ni´-ḳa-i-çi-wa-the and Ḳi´-o.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman. Wife of Wa-çe´-ṭoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Hiⁿ-sha´-a-xthi or Zhiⁿ-ga´-ga-hi-ge of
    the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of P̣a´-zhi-hi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.


ÇI^N´-DSE-A-GTHE (WEARERS-OF-LOCKS)


MALE

    Moⁿ-iⁿ´-ḳa-u-ga-hni. (Meaning obscure.) Son of U-hoⁿ´-ge-u-zhoⁿ
    and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    Ni-oⁿ´-ba-giu-e. (Meaning obscure.) Son of U-hoⁿ´-ge-u-zhoⁿ and
    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    U-hoⁿ´-ge-u-zhoⁿ, Lies-at-the-end. Also Shoⁿ´-ge-thi-hi,
    Dog-scarer. Refers to the dog, one of the life symbols of the
    gens.

    Wa-hiu´-tha-zhu, Bone-gnawer. Refers to the habit of the dog.
    Son of U-hoⁿ´-ge-u-zhoⁿ and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-noⁿ-p̣a-iⁿ, The-god-who-is-feared. Refers to the
    constellation, Canis Major, the life symbol of this gens.


FEMALE

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba, Two-standards.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman. Daughter of U-hoⁿ´-ge-u-zhoⁿ
    and Gia-çoⁿ-ba.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Moⁿ-iⁿ´-ḳa-moⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.


ṬSI´-ZHU WA-SHTA-GE

Special kinship terms and names of the first three sons and the first
three daughters in a family of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens, as given
by Btho´-ga-hi-ge.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Wa-ṭsi´-da. (Meaning obscure.)

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. Ni´-wa-the, Life-giver. Refers to the office of
    the gens to give the word that a captive shall live and not be
    killed.

    3. Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga. Moⁿ´-ça-noⁿ-pa-i. (Meaning obscure.)


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Xi-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle.

    2. Wi´-he. Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi, Sacred-arrowshaft.

    3. A-çin´-ga. Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsi-i-ṭa. (Meaning obscure.)


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    A´-hiu-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-wings. Husband of E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi of the
    Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    A´-hiu-zhiⁿ-ga. Son of O-tho´-xa-wa-the and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Btho´-ga-hi-ge, Chief-of-all. Refers to the sacred character
    of the position of the hereditary chief chosen from this
    gens to represent the Ṭsi´-zhu tribal division. Husband of
    Wa´-dsi-u-hi-zhi of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Ga-hi´-ge-ṭoⁿ, Standing-chief. Refers to the position of the
    hereditary chief of the Ṭsi´-zhu tribal division.

    Ga-hi´-ge-ṭoⁿ. Son of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga and Doⁿ´-a-bi.

    Ga-hi´-ge-ṭoⁿ. Son of P̣i-çi´ and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    Ga-hi´-ge-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-chief. Refers to the high position of the
    hereditary chief of the Ṭsi´-zhu tribal division. Husband of
    Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ḳa-wiⁿ of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-moⁿ-çe, Iron-hawk. Husband of Mi´-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-hawk. Son of Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Gthe-moⁿ´-zhiⁿ-ga. (Meaning obscure.) Young Claremore. Husband
    of Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Ha-xiⁿ-u´-mi-zhe. (Not a gentile name.) Husband of
    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ba-tha-gthiⁿ, Peaceful-day. Refers to the office of the
    gens as Peacemaker. (Used in the Iⁿ-shta´-çoⁿ-da gens of the
    Omaha tribe as a woman’s name.) Son of Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ.

    Ho-wa´-ça-e. (Meaning obscure.) Husband of Ni´-ḳa-a-ça of the
    Tho´-xe gens.

    Ḳa´-xe-thoⁿ-ba, Two-crows. The significance of this name is
    lost. (In the Hoⁿ´-ga gens of the Omaha tribe refers to the
    feathers of two crows used in making the staff of authority in
    the buffalo hunt.)

    Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga, Playful-sun. Refers to the sun as one of the
    symbols of this gens. Husband of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ
    gens.

    Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga. Husband of Doⁿ´-a-bi of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Moⁿ´-ça-noⁿ-p̣a-iⁿ, Dreaded-arrow-shaft. Son of
    P̣a-hoⁿ-gthe-ga-xthi.

    Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ, Iron-necklace.

    Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ. Also Ṭsi´-zhu-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful Ṭsi-zhu.
    Husband of Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Moⁿ´-ha-u-gthiⁿ, Sits-under-a-bank. Husband of Miⁿ-chu´-xa-ge
    of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳon-da-gi gens.

    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da, Watches-over-the-land. Husband of
    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-wa-shta-ge gens.

    Moⁿ-shoⁿ-a´-shiⁿ-e, Travels-over-the-land. Son of Ga-hi´-ge-toⁿ
    and Iⁿ´-be zhoⁿ-ḳa-wiⁿ.

    Moⁿ-to´-e. The-earth.

    Ni´-wa-the, Giver-of-life. Refers to the authority of this gens
    to permit captives to live.

    Ni´-wa-the. Son of Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Ni´-wa-the. Son of Gthe-moⁿ´-zhiⁿ-ga and Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba.

    Ni´-wa-the. Husband of Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ka of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Ni´-wa-the. Son of O-tho´-xa-wa-the and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Noⁿ-be´-çi, Yellow-hands. Refers to the yellow feet of
    the eagle, one of the life symbols of this gens. Son of
    Btho-ga-hi-ge.

    Noⁿ-be´-çi. Son of Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Noⁿ-be´-çi. Son of Ha-xiⁿ-u´-mi-zhe and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    O-ḳi´-ça. (Meaning obscure.) Husband of Mi´-tse-xi-hoⁿ-ga of
    the Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    O-pa´-sho-e. (Meaning obscure.) Husband of Wa-ṭoⁿ-i´-ça-e of
    the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    O-tho´-xa-wa-the. (Meaning obscure.) Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ
    of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ gens.

    P̣a´-ba-wa-xoⁿ, Head-cutter. Refers to the custom of
    cutting off the heads of the enemy. Son of O-pa´-sho-e and
    Wa-ṭoⁿi´-ça-e.

    P̣a´-ba-wa-xoⁿ. Son of Ni-ḳa´-shi-e of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga
    gens.

    P̣a´-ba-wa-xoⁿ. Son of Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ.

    P̣a´-ba-wa-xoⁿ. Son of P̣i-çi´ and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    P̣a´-ba-wa-xoⁿ. Son of Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    P̣a´-ba-wa-xoⁿ. Son of Wa-çe´-ṭoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga. (Louis Pryor.)

    P̣a´-ba-wa-xoⁿ. Son of Gthe-doⁿ´-moⁿ-çe and Mi´-ṭse-xi.

    P̣a-hiu´-çka, White-hair. (In the Hoⁿ´-ga gens of the Omaha
    tribe and refers to the sacred white buffalo.) Husband of
    Mi´-doⁿ-a-bi of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    P̣i´-çi´, Acorn-of-the-red-oak. Refers to the mythical story
    of the eagle causing the acorns to drop down in showers as he
    alighted on a red oak when he came down from the sky. Husband
    of Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ, Walking-dog. (War name.) This man belonged
    to the Ba´-po subgens of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens. This
    subgens had the office of making the stem for the peace pipe.
    The stem was made from the elder tree, which was called
    ba-po, popper, because boys made popguns out of this tree.
    Ba´-po-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-ba-po, is one of the child names of this
    gens. Husband of Wa-ṭse´-wiⁿ of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Thoⁿ-ba´-zhi. (Meaning obscure.) Son of Thoⁿ´-dse-wa-hi.

    Thoⁿ´-dse-wa-hi, Bone-heart.

    Ṭoⁿ´-woⁿ-ga-xe, Village-maker. (In Moⁿ-iⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe gens of the
    Omaha tribe.) Husband of Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga
    gens.

    Ṭoⁿ-woⁿ´-i-hi, Arrives-at-the-village. Son of Ni´-wa-the.

    Ṭoⁿ-woⁿ´-i-hi. Husband of Ṭse-çoⁿ´-wiⁿ of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Ṭo´-thi-xtho-dse, Potato-peeler. Husband of P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse of
    the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Ṭs’e-moⁿ´-iⁿ, Walks-in-death. Son of Wa-thi´-gthoⁿ-thiⁿ-ge.

    Ṭsi´-zhu-ga-hi-ge, Ṭsi-zhu-chief. Son of Wa-çe´-ṭoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga and
    Xu-tha-da-wiⁿ.

    Ṭsi´-zhuⁿ-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred-Ṭsi-zhu. Refers to the sacred
    character of the office of the gens. Husband of
    Gthe-doⁿ´-çoⁿ-wiⁿ of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Ṭsi´-zhu-zhiⁿ-ga, Young-Ṭsi-zhu. Husband of Ṭse´-mi-ṭse-xi of
    the Tho´-xe gens.

    Ṭsi´-zhu-zhiⁿ-ga. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Wa-çe´-ṭoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga. (Meaning obscure.) Husband of
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Wa-çe´-ṭoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga. (Louis Pryor.)

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-i-e, One-who-saw-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Son of
    Wa-thi´-gthoⁿ-thiⁿ-ge.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-i-e. Son of P̣i-çi´ and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-i-e. Son of Moⁿ-zho-a´-ḳi-da and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-i-e. Son of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga and Doⁿ´-a-bi.

    Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-i-e. Son of O-tho´-xa-wa-the and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Wa-ni´-e-toⁿ, Giver-of-life. Refers to the office of this gens
    as a peace-maker. Son of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa-ni´-e-ṭoⁿ. Son of Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi
    gens.

    Wa-ni´-e-ṭoⁿ. Son of Ha-xiⁿ-u´-mi-zhe and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Wa-ni´-e-ṭoⁿ. Husband of Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ, Good-doctor. Refers to the practice of the
    people of bringing their sick to some member of this gens
    to be fed ceremonially so that they may get well. Son of
    P̣a-hoⁿ´-gthe-ga-xthi and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of A-hiu´-zhiⁿ-e and E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of Btho´-ga-hi-ge.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Husband of Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of Ṭsi´-zhu-hoⁿ-ga.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of Noⁿ-be´-çi and Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of Ha-xiⁿ-u´-mi-zhe and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of Ṭo´-thi-xtho-dse and P̣a´-xpi-coⁿ-dse.

    Wa-stse´-e-doⁿ. Son of Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ and Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ.

    Wa-thi´-gthoⁿ-thiⁿ-ge, No-mind. (Not Ni-ḳi-e.) (In
    Moⁿ´-thiⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe gens of the Omaha tribe.) Also
    Ha´-ba-zhu-dse, Red-corn, a name which refers to a life symbol
    of the gens. Husband of Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Wa´-thu-xa-ge, Clutches-them-till-they-cry. Refers to the
    attack of the eagle on its prey. Husband of Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi
    of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-ga-ça-be, Black-bird. (In the Moⁿ-iⁿ´-ḳa-ga-xe gens of
    the Omaha tribe.) Husband of Doⁿ´-a-bi of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-ga-hiⁿ, Bird-feathers. Refers to the eagle, one of the
    life symbols of the gens. Son of Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ.

    Xu-tha´-ṭs’a-ge, Aged-eagle. Refers to the eagle as a symbol of
    long life. Son of Ṭsi-zhu-hoⁿ-ga and Gthe-doⁿ´-çoⁿ-wiⁿ.

    Xu-tha´-ṭs’a-ge. Son of Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Xu-tha´-zhu-dse, Red eagle. Refers to the life symbol of the
    gens.

    Xu-tha´-zhu-dse. Son of P̣i-çi´ and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    Xu-tha´-zhu-dse. Husband of Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.


FEMALE

    Mary Cox. Daughter of A-hiu´-zhiⁿ-e and E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi.

    E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi, One-only-seen-by-all. Refers to the sun, one
    of the life symbols of the gens. Daughter of Ṭsi´-zhu-hoⁿ-ga
    and Gthe-doⁿ´-çoⁿ-wiⁿ.

    E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi. Daughter of Noⁿ-be´-çi and
    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi.

    E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi. Daughter of Gthe-doⁿ´-moⁿ-çe and Mi´-ṭse-xi.

    E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi. Daughter of O-tho´-xa-wa-the and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ, Hawk-woman. (Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi name.) Daughter
    of P̣a´-hiu-çka and Mi´-doⁿ-a-bi. (In Moⁿ´-thiⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe gens
    of the Omaha tribe.)

    Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ni´-ḳa-zhu-e of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Hi´-ga-moⁿ-ge, Eagle-down. Refers to the use of the eagle down
    in the tribal ceremonies.

    Hi´-ga-moⁿ-ge. Daughter of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga and Doⁿ´-a-bi.

    Hi´-ga-moⁿ-ge. Daughter of O-tho´-xa-wa-the and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi, Eagle-down. Refers to the eagle, a symbol of
    long life. Wife of Gthi´-kshe of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ gens.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi. Daughter of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga and Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi. Granddaughter of Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-oⁿ-be, wife of
    Moⁿ-xe-a-gthe.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi. Daughter of Ṭsi´-zhu-hoⁿ-ga and
    Gthe-doⁿ´-çoⁿ-wiⁿ.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi. Wife of Ṭse-do´-a-ṭoⁿ-ga of the Tho´-xe gens.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi. Daughter of Mi-da-iⁿ-ga and Doⁿ´-a-bi.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi. Wife of Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-ṭsi-e of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi. Wife of Xu-tha´-wa-ṭoⁿ-iⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-noⁿ gens.

    I´-ga-moⁿ-ge, same as Hi´-ga-moⁿ-ge. Daughter of P̣a-hiu´-çka
    and Mi´-doⁿ-a-bi.

    I´-ga-moⁿ-ge. Wife of John Lookout of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    I´-ni-a-bi, Protector. Refers to the duty of this gens to
    protect those who flee to the house of refuge, in the keeping
    of this gens, for protection. Daughter of P̣a-hoⁿ´-ga-ga-xthi
    and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    I´-ni-a-bi, Annie Daniels.

    I´-ni-a-bi. Daughter of Btho´-ga-hi-ge.

    I´-ni-a-bi. Daughter of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga and Doⁿ´-a-bi.

    I´-ni-a-bi. Wife of A´-hiu-çka of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    I´-ni-a-bi. Daughter of Xu-tha´-zhu-dse and Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi, Sacred-arrow-shaft. Wife of Moⁿ-shi-ṭa-moⁿ-iⁿ.
    (This is an Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga name.)

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Wa-sho´-she of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Gi´-thi-ḳoⁿ-bi of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-ça of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Wife of O-tha´-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ
    gens.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of O-ḳi´-ça and Mi-ṭse´-xi-hoⁿ-ga.

    Moⁿ´-zhoⁿ-dsi-i-ṭa. Born-on-the-earth. Daughter of P̣i-çi´ and
    Çoⁿ-çi-gthe.

    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsi-i-ṭa. Daughter of Wa-çe´-ṭoⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga and
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsi-i-ṭa. Wife of Wa-zhiⁿ´-wa-xa of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge.

    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-dsi-i-ṭa. Wife of Çoⁿ-dse-u´-gthiⁿ or We´-iⁿ-ga-xe.

    P̣a-hiu´-thi-shoⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Daughter of
    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da.

    Wa-ça´-a-ba. (Meaning obscure.) Daughter of Moⁿ´-çe-noⁿ-p’iⁿ.

    Wa-ça´-be-wiⁿ, Black-bear-woman. Daughter of Noⁿ-be´-çi and
    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Wa-k’o´-ga-hi-ge, Woman-chief. (Not a gentile name.)

    Wa-k’o´-ga-hi-ge. Wife of Xu-tha´-xtsi of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Daisy Ware. Daughter of Ha-xiⁿ-u´-mi-zhe and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Wa-zha´-xe-iⁿ (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Ṭse-do´-ga-iⁿ-dse of
    the Ṭse-do´-ga-iⁿ-dse gens.

    Wa-zha´-xe-iⁿ. Wife of Mi´-she-ṭsi-the of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman. Daughter of P̣a-hiu´-çka and
    Mi´-doⁿ-a-bi.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Çoⁿ-dse´-ḳoⁿ-ha of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Wa-xthi´-zhi of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Noⁿ´-ḳa-ṭo-ho of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens. (Daughter of Shoⁿ´-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ.)

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of P̣oⁿ´-ḳa-zhiⁿ-ga of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ho-wa´-ça-e and Ni´-ḳa-a-ça.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ṭoⁿ´-woⁿ-ga-xe and Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Noⁿ´-ḳoⁿ-çe-wiⁿ of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ni´-wa-the.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Augustine Crow.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Ni´-ḳa-wa-da-iⁿ-ga of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Moⁿ-zhoⁿ-a´-ḳi-da and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga and Doⁿ´-a-bi.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ha-xiⁿ-u´-mi-zhe and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Wa-ni´-e-ṭoⁿ and Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ni´-wa-the and Iⁿ´-be-zhoⁿ-ḳa.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Ḳo´-zhi-çi-gthe of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Thon´-dse-ṭoⁿ-ga of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ṭo´-thi-xtho-dse and
    P̣a´-xpi-çoⁿ-dse.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Ga-hi´-ge-noⁿ-zhiⁿ of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of A´-ḳi-da-zhiⁿ-ga of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.


ṬSE-DO´-GA Iⁿ-DSE GENS


MALE

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi, Taken-for-a-Hoⁿ´-ga. Refers to a mythical story
    in which it is said that the Wa-zha´-zhe mistook the Ṭsi´-zhu
    for the Hoⁿ´-ga on their first meeting.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi. Son of Ṭse-do´-ga-iⁿ-dse and Wa-zha´-xe-iⁿ.

    Ṭse-do´-ga-iⁿ-dse, Buffalo-bull-face. Refers to the description
    given by the tribal messenger of the first buffalo he found.
    Husband of Wa-zha´-xe-iⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭse-p̣a-u´-thiⁿ-ga, Holder-of-the-buffalo-head. Refers to the
    butchering of the first buffalo found.

    Wa´-ḳi-a-shke, Tied-together. Refers to the tying of two pieces
    of meat by the hunter for convenience of carrying.

    Wa-ṭo-ge´, Active. Husband of I´-ni-a-bi of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-zha´-a-ḳi-p̣a, Met-the-Wa-zha´-zhe. Son of Wa-ṭo-ge´ and
    I´-ni-a-bi.

    Xu-tha´-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, Mysterious-eagle. Son of Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of
    the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.


FEMALE

    Gia´-çoⁿ-wiⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Daughter of Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of
    the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman. Daughter of Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of
    the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Daughter of Ṭse-do´-ga-iⁿ-dse and Wa-zha´-xe-iⁿ.


ṬSE THO^N´-ḲA GENS

(Only one of this gens survives)

    Ṭse´-mi-ṭse-xi, Sacred-buffalo-woman. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens
    of the Omaha tribe.) Wife of Xu-tha´-p̣a of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.


MI-Ḳ’I^N´ GENS

Special kinship terms and personal names of the first three sons and
the first three daughters in a family of the Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´, Sun-carrier
gens, as given by E-hiu´-gthe, a member of the gens.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi, Mistaken-for-a-Hoⁿ´-ga.

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. Gthe-doⁿ´-ga-xe, Hawk-maker.

    3. Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga. Mi´-hi-the, Sun-down; also, Mi´-hi-the-zhiⁿ-ga,
    Little-sun-down.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman.

    2. Wi´-he. Mi´-doⁿ-a-bi, Sun-that-is-looked-at.

    3. Çi´-ge or A-çiⁿ-ga. Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´-wiⁿ, Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´-woman.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    George. Son of Mi´-hi-the and Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-thoⁿ-be.

    Gthe-doⁿ-a-xe, Hawk-maker.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-wa-ḳoⁿ, Mystery-hawk. Son of I´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Wa-ṭoⁿ-i´-ça-e.

    Gthi´-kshe, The returned. Refers to the new moon. Husband of
    Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi, Mistaken-for-a-Hoⁿ´-ga.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi. Son of Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e-zhiⁿ-ga and Moⁿ´-bthoⁿ-ba.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi. Son of Mi´-hi-the and Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-ha-bi. Son of Mi-tho-ṭoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga and
    P̣a-hiu´-e-çe.

    Hoⁿ´-i-ḳa-zhi. (Meaning obscure.) Son of Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e-zhiⁿ-ga and
    Moⁿ´-bthoⁿ-ba.

    I´-gi-a-ba-zhi, Lost. Refers to the waning of the moon. Son of
    I´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ and Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e.

    I´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ. (Meaning obscure.) Husband of Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e of
    the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    John. Son of Mi´-hi-the and Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be.

    Mi´-hi-the, Sunset. Refers to the sun, one of the life symbols
    of this gens. Husband of Wa-ḳoⁿ´-da-hi-thoⁿ-be of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Mi-ḳa´-ḳ’e-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-star. Husband of Moⁿ´-bthoⁿ-ba of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful-Mi-ḳ’iⁿ. Husband of
    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga. Also E-hiu-gthe, Elm-creek, given to him
    in honor of his father, who was killed in battle on a creek
    by that name. Also Be-ga-xa-zhi, Never-beaten. Husband of
    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Mi-tho-ṭoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga, Young-mid-day. Refers to the sun,
    one of the life symbols of this gens. Husband of P̣a-hiu´-e-çe.

    Ṭoⁿ´-iⁿ-kshe, Moon-returned-to-sight. Refers to the new moon.
    Son of Mi-ḳ’iⁿ-wa-da-iⁿ-ga and Wa-xthe-thoⁿ-ba.

    Wa-zha´-a-ḳi-p̣a, Met-the-Wa-zha´-zhe. Refers to the first
    meeting of the Ṭsi´-zhu and the Wa-zha´-zhe divisions. Son of
    Mi-tho´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ and Wa-ṭoⁿ-i-ça-e.

    Wa-zhiⁿ-ga-tha-gthiⁿ, Good-bird.

    Wa´-zhoⁿ-gi-the, Met-them-by-chance. (Hall Good.)

    Zhoⁿ-i´-ni-tha, Clings-to-tree-for-safety. Also Ḳa´-xe-a-gthoⁿ,
    Crow-head-dress.


FEMALE

    Doⁿ´-a-bi, Looked-upon. Refers to the sun, one of the
    life symbols of the gens. Daughter of I´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ and
    Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e.

    Mi´-doⁿ-a-bi, Sun-looked-upon. Wife of P̣a-hiu´-çka of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Mi´-doⁿ-a-bi. Daughter of Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga and
    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba.

    Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ, Sun-that-travels. (In the Hoⁿ´-ga gens of the
    Omaha tribe.) Daughter of Mi-tho´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ and Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi, Sacred-arrow-shaft.

    Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Mi-da´-iⁿ-ga of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Ni´-ḳa, Person. Wife of Kshi´-zhi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Wa´-ṭse-wiⁿ, Star-woman. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha
    tribe.) Wife of Shoⁿ-ge-moⁿ-iⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba, Two-standards. Wife of Gthe-moⁿ´-zhiⁿ-ga of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ, Good-eagle-woman. Wife of Moⁿ´-ge-ça-be of the
    O´-poⁿ gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ. Wife of Iⁿ-shta´-moⁿ-çe of the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga
    gens.

    Xu-tha´-da-wi. Wife of O-tho´-xa-wa-the of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge.


HO^N´ I-NI-ḲA-SHI-GA (NIGHT-PEOPLE)

Special kinship terms and personal names of the first three sons and
the first three daughters in a family of the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens,
as given by Ni´-ḳa-thoⁿ-ba, a member of the gens.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Moves-in-the-night.

    2. Kshon´-ga. Ṭsi´-zhu-u-thu-ha-ge,
    Last-in-the-order-of-the-Ṭsi´-zhu.

    3. Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga. Hoⁿ´ga-i-ṭa-zhi, Not-of-the-Hoⁿ´-ga. Also
    Hoⁿ´-ba-hiu, Day-comes.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite.

    2. Wi´-he. Hoⁿ-wa´-k’u, Night-woman.

    3. Çi´-ge or A-çiⁿ´-ga, E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi, Only-one-that-is-seen.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    Çiⁿ´-dse-thiⁿ-ge, No-tail. Refers to the red black bear, the
    symbol of the Black bear gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu division. (Hayes
    Little-bear.)

    Hoⁿ´-ba-hiu, Day-comes. Refers to the passing of night, the
    life symbol of this gens. Husband of Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ba-hiu. Husband of Çoⁿ-çi´-gthe of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-a-ḳa-zhi. (Meaning obscure.) Son of
    Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi, wife of Noⁿ-be-çi.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-a-ḳa-zhi. Son of Tho-ṭa-a-ça of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi
    gens, wife of Ḳi´-moⁿ-hoⁿ of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Traveling-night. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the
    Omaha tribe.) Son of Ni´-ḳa-thoⁿ-ba.

    Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ. (Andrew Jackson.)

    Ni´-ḳa-a-ḳi-ba-noⁿ, Runs-to-meet-men. Also E´-zhi-ga-xthi,
    Slew-the-wrong-man. (War name.) Husband of Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ-ṭse-xi
    of the Ni-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    Ni´-ḳa-thoⁿ-ba, Two-men.

    P̣e´-dse-moⁿ-iⁿ, Fire-walker. Refers to the finding of the red
    bear, the life symbol of this gens. He was found walking in
    the night, a light like that of fire shining from his breast.
    Husband of We´-tsiⁿ-thu-ça of the Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    Sho´-dse, Smoke. Refers to the duty of this gens to
    light the ceremonial pipe. Son of Ni´-ḳa-a-ḳi-ba-noⁿ and
    Gthe-doⁿ-wiⁿ-ṭse-xi.

    We´-ça-ba-zhi. (Meaning obscure.) Son of Ni´-ḳa-a-ḳi-ba-noⁿ and
    Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ-ṭse-xi.

    Xoⁿ´-dse-u-moⁿ-iⁿ, Walks-among-cedars. Refers to the habit of
    the bears. Husband of Xu-tha´-wiⁿ of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.


FEMALE

    E-noⁿ´-a-bi, Only-one-seen-by-all. Refers to the sun. Wife of
    A-hiu-zhiⁿ-e of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Hoⁿ´-doⁿ-wa-ḳ’u, Woman-of-the-night.

    Mi-doⁿ´-be, Sees-the-sun. Daughter of Ni´-ḳa-a-ḳi-ba-noⁿ and
    Mi´-ṭse-xi, Mi´-na-the-favorite. (In Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the
    Omaha tribe.) Wife of Tha-çiu´-e of the I´-ba-ṭse gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Wife of Gthe-doⁿ´-moⁿ-çe of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Tho´-ṭa-a-ça of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi
    gens, wife of Ḳi´-moⁿ-hoⁿ of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Mi´-ṭse-xi. Wife of Thi-hi´-bi of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Ni´-ḳa-shi-ṭsi-the. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Chi-zhe´-wa-the
    of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Wa-ça´-be-wiⁿ, Black-bear-woman. Refers to the symbol of the
    Black Bear gens of the Ṭsi´-zhu division. (Lucy H. Bangs.)

The following are special kinship terms and personal names of the first
three sons and the first three daughters in a family of this gens, as
given by Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ, a member. This man told the following story of
the origin of this gens:

When the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga, People of the Night, were made they had
fire. They wandered about upon the earth, but saw no people. At the
beginning of day, when night had passed, they suddenly came upon the
Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ, a warlike people. The Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga offered
their services to these strangers, which were accepted. The Ṭsi´-zhu
Wa-noⁿ gave to the Hoⁿ´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga the office of Sho´-ḳa, which
carried with it the duty of filling the ceremonial pipe and lighting it
with the mystic fire of the People of the Night.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Hoⁿ´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Traveling-night.

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga´. Sho´-dse, Smoke. Referring to the sacred fire.

    3. Ka´-zhiⁿ-ga. Ṭa-ḳoⁿ´-iⁿ-ge, No-sinews. The black bear are
    said to have no sinew.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Mi´-na-the-favorite.

    2. Wa-ça´-be-wiⁿ, Black-bear-woman.

    3. Çi´-ge. E-noⁿ´-doⁿ-a-bi, Seen-by-all. All living creatures
    see the sun.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    Çi-gthe´-wa-thi-ṭa, Crosses-trail. The bear in his wanderings
    crosses the trails of other animals.

    Çi-the´-dse-xo-dse, Gray-heels.

    Da´-ḳoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ, Walks-as-in-fire-light.

    Hoⁿ´-ga-thi-ḳa-zhi. (Meaning obscure.)

    Hoⁿ-gthi´, Night-has-returned.

    Moⁿ-ḳoⁿ´, Medicine.

    O-ḳoⁿ´-dsi-wa-shkoⁿ, Struggles-by-himself. No one to help him
    fight.

    O-pa´-stse-dse, Long-body.

    P̣a-çi´, Brown-nose.

    Sha´-ge-btha-çka, Flat-hands.

    Tho´-ṭoⁿ-gthi-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Stands-upright.

    Wa-ça´-e-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi, Mysterious-bear.

    Wa-ça´-e-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-bear.

    Wa-shiⁿ´-shtoⁿ-ga, Soft-fat.

    Wa-xa´-xa-doⁿ, Shaggy-hair.

    Xo´-ga-hiⁿ-e-goⁿ, Hair-like-badger’s.


FEMALE

    Hoⁿ-wa´-k’u, Night-woman.

    Mi´-zhoⁿ-çka. (Meaning obscure.)

    Ni´-ḳa-shi-ṭsi-the, Person-passes-by.

    Wa-xthe´-thoⁿ-ba, Two-standards.


NI´-ḲA-WA-ḲO^N-DA-GI (MEN OF MYSTERY)

Special kinship terms and personal names of the first three sons and
first three daughters in a family of this gens. The thunder is the life
symbol of this gens.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Gthe-doⁿ´-ṭse-ga, New-hawk. Refers to the
    reconsecration of the hawk, the symbol of courage of the
    warrior. Also Gthe-doⁿ-xo-e, Gray-hawk. Refers to the grayish
    appearance of the hawk when it is painted afresh at a ceremony.

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. Gthe-doⁿ´-çka, White-hawk. Refers to the whitish
    appearance of the hawk when freshly painted.

    3. Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga. Ni-uⁿ´-ṭsi-gthe, Rumbling-in-the-distance.
    Refers to the low rumbling of the thunder in an approaching
    storm. Also Hu´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ, Roars-as-he-comes.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mi´-na. Gthe-doⁿ´-mi-ṭse-ga, New-hawk-woman. Refers to the
    reconsecration of the symbolic hawk.

    2. Wi´-he. Tho´-ṭa-a-ça. (Meaning obscure.)

    3. Çi´-ge. Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-hawk-woman. Refers to
    the smallest of the hawks.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    A´-gthi-he-the, Returns-to-his-place. Refers to the returning
    of the symbolic hawk to its place after a ceremony.

    A´-ḳi-da-ga-hi-ge, Chief-protector. Title of one of the
    protectors of the chiefs.

    Ba´-çiu-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-hail.

    Çe´-ça-gi-da, Returns-trotting.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-çka, White-hawk. (Kshoⁿ-ga name.) Son of
    Noⁿ´-ḳa-ṭo-ho and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-çka. Husband of Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-çka. Son of Gthe-doⁿ´-çka and Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-çka. Son of We-ṭoⁿ´-ha-iⁿ-ga and Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-çka. Son of Noⁿ´-p̣e-wa-the and Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-ṭse-ga, New-hawk. (Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´ name.)

    Gthe-doⁿ´-ṭsi-e, Hawk-passing-by. Refers to a hawk attacking
    its prey. Son of Ṭoⁿ´-woⁿ-ga-she and Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ.

    Gthi-noⁿ´-zhiⁿ, Returns-and-stands. Refers to the return of the
    war-hawk after a successful attack upon the enemy.

    Ḳe-noⁿ´-xu-xe, Cracks-the-turtle-with-his-foot.

    Ḳe´-tha-moⁿ-iⁿ, Clear-day-approaching. Refers to the oncoming
    of the clear sky after a thunderstorm.

    Ḳi-xi´-tha-ba-zhi, Self-confident. Refers to the warlike spirit
    of this gens.

    Mi-ḳa´-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful-raccoon.

    Mi-ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-raccoon.

    Mi-tsiu´-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-grizzly-bear.

    Moⁿ-ge´-çi, Yellow-breast. A swallow. A bird that is closely
    associated with thunderstorms.

    Moⁿ-xpi´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Traveling-cloud. (In the Iⁿ-shta´-çoⁿ-da gens
    of the Omaha tribe.)

    Ni-zhiu´-ça-ge, Violent-rain.

    Ni-zhiu´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Traveling-rain.

    Ni-zhiu´-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-rain.

    Noⁿ´-ḳa-ṭo-ho, Blue-back. Refers to the sacred hawk whose back
    is painted blue. (In the Iⁿ-gthe´-zhi-de gens of the Omaha
    tribe.) Also, Mi-ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga. Refers to the raccoon-skin robe
    of this gens used in ceremonies. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Noⁿ´-p̣e-wa-the, Fear-inspiring. Refers to the fear inspired
    by the thunder. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha tribe.)
    Husband of Hoⁿ-ga-wiⁿ of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    O-pa´-the-e. (Meaning obscure.) Saucy-calf thinks it is a valor
    name.

    P̣a-thiⁿ´-wa-xpa-thiⁿ, Poor-Pawnee. Refers to the killing of a
    half-starved Pawnee by an Osage.

    Pratt, Charles. Son of Noⁿ´-p̣e-wa-the and Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ.

    Sha´-wa-biⁿ, Bloody-hands. Refers to the talons of a hawk.

    Shi-thoⁿ´-dse-we-tsiⁿ, Strikes-with-the-knee.

    Ṭoⁿ´-woⁿ-ga-she, Taker-of-towns. This man has the office of
    renewing of the sacred hawks. Husband of Xu-tha´-da-wiⁿ of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Wa-hiu´-ga-xthi, Strikes-the-bones. Valor name.

    Wa´-thu-da-çe, Crashing-sound. Refers to the thunder.

    We´-ṭoⁿ-ha-iⁿ-ge. (Meaning obscure.) Husband of Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa
    of the Ṭa´ I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Wa-xo´-be-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-shrine. Refers to the small portable
    shrine containing the hawk and other symbolic articles.

    Wa-zhiⁿ´-ni-ḳa, Bird-man.

    Xo´-ḳa, Initiator. (Not gentile name.) Husband of Gthoⁿ-zhoⁿ-ba
    of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Xoⁿ´-dse-u-moⁿ-iⁿ, Dwell-among-the-cedars. The thunder and the
    lightning are said to live among the cedars.

    Xu-e´-gi-da, Comes-roaring. Refers to the coming of the storm
    with roaring winds.

    Xu-e´-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Stands-soughing. Refers to the murmuring of the
    cedar tree as the wind passes through its branches.

    Zhoⁿ´-ga-xthi, Tree-killer. Refers to the habit of the
    lightning of striking trees.

    Zhoⁿ´-u-thi-stse-ge, Tree-splitter. Refers to the splitting of
    a tree by lightning.


FEMALE

    Gthe-doⁿ´-çoⁿ-wiⁿ, White-hawk-woman. Refers to the white paint
    put upon some of the sacred hawks. Wife of Ṭsi´-zhu-hoⁿ-ga of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi, Hawk-Mi-na-the-favorite.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of Zhiⁿ-ga´-wa-ça of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi. Wife of P̣i´-zhi-ṭoⁿ-ga of the Tho´-xe
    gens.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi. Daughter of Noⁿ´-p̣e-wa-the and
    Hoⁿ´-ga-wiⁿ.

    Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ, Hawk-woman. Refers to the sacred hawks. (In the
    Moⁿ´-thiⁿ-ḳa-ga-xe gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Gthe-doⁿ´-wiⁿ-ṭse-xi, Hawk-Mi-na-the favorite. (In the
    Ṭa-p̣a´ of the Omaha tribe.) Daughter of We-ṭoⁿ´-ha-iⁿ-ga and
    Hoⁿ-be´-do-ḳa.

    I’ⁿ´-shoⁿ-ba. (Meaning obscure.) Daughter of Moⁿ´-çi-ṭse-xi of
    the Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Miⁿ-tsiu´-xa-ge. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Moⁿ-ha-u-gthiⁿ of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Tho-ṭa´-a-ça. (Meaning obscure.) (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the
    Omaha tribe.) Daughter of Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Tho-ṭa´-ṭa-ça. Daughter of Ḳi-xi´-tha-ba-zhi and Mi´-çoⁿ-iⁿ.

    Tho´-ṭa-a-ça. Wife of Ḳi´-moⁿ-hoⁿ of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Wa´-dsi-u-hi-zhi. (Meaning obscure.) Wife of Btho´-ga-hi-ge of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Xoⁿ´-dse-wiⁿ, Cedar-woman. The cedar is a tree that is closely
    associated with thunder.

    Xo´-ṭa-wiⁿ, Blackbird-woman. The blackbird is one of the
    war symbols of the Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens. Daughter of
    Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.


THO´-XE GENS

Special kinship terms and personal names of the first three sons and
the first three daughters in a family of the Tho´-xe gens, as given by
Saucy-calf.


SONS

    1. Iⁿ-gthoⁿ´. Ḳoⁿ´-çe-wa-e. (Meaning obscure.)

    2. Kshoⁿ´-ga. Hiⁿ-ba´-sda, Sheds-his-hair. Refers to the
    shedding of hair by the buffalo.

    3. Ḳa´-zhiⁿ-ga. Ṭse-zhiⁿ´-hoⁿ-ga, Sacred-calf.


DAUGHTERS

    1. Mina. Doⁿ´-a-bi, Gazed-upon. Also Tho´-xe-wiⁿ, Tho´-xe-woman.

    2. Wi´-he. P̣a-hiu´-thi-shoⁿ, Shaggy-head.

    3. Çi´-ge, or A-çiⁿ´-ga. Ṭse-mi´-çi, Brown-buffalo-woman.
    Also Boⁿ-gi´-da, The-lowing-herd. Also Ṭse-mi´-xtsi,
    Real-buffalo-woman.


OTHER NAMES


MALE

    A´-ga-ha-moⁿ-iⁿ, Walks-outside. Refers to the bulls, that are
    in the habit of walking outside of the herd.

    A´-ga-zhoⁿ, Bushy. Refers to the bushy hair on the front legs
    of the buffalo bull.

    A´-hiⁿ-u-ha-zhi-hi, Red-forelegs. Refers to the reddish-brown
    legs of the buffalo.

    Çi-ha´, Soles. Refers to the footprints of the buffalo. (In the
    Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Çi-ha´, Son of Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    Çiⁿ´-dse-ço-ṭa, Slender-tail. Refers to the slender tail of the
    buffalo.

    Çiⁿ´-dse-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, Mystic-tail. Refers to the scalps attached
    to the tail of the sacred hawk.

    Çiⁿ´-dse-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Son of Ṭse´-çe-ṭoⁿ-ga and Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ.

    Çiⁿ´-dse-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Son of Noⁿ´-ba-moⁿ-thiⁿ and
    Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi.

    Çiⁿ´-dse-wa-ḳoⁿ-da. Son of Mi´-ga-shoⁿ-iⁿ, wife of
    Moⁿ´-zhi-çka-ḳ’iⁿ-ga-xthi.

    Çiⁿ´-dse-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-tail. Refers to the tail of the
    buffalo.

    Çi´-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-feet. Refers to the great size of the buffalo’s
    feet. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Da´-ba-dsiⁿ, Swollen. Refers to the wounded buffalo found dead
    in a state of decomposition.

    Do´-ba-moⁿ-thiⁿ, Walk-by-fours. Refers to the habit of the
    bulls of walking by fours. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the
    Omaha tribe.) Husband of Mi´-hoⁿ-ga of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Do´-ba-moⁿ-thiⁿ. Son of Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    Fletcher, Francis. Son of Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga and Mi´-çoⁿ-e.

    Ga-dsiⁿ´-gthi-thoⁿ, Crosses. Refers to the hungry calf that
    runs in front of its mother to stop her. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be
    gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    Gthe-doⁿ´-stse-dse, Long-hawk. Refers to the long scalp locks
    attached to the sacred hawks. Son of Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga and
    Gia´-çoⁿ-ba.

    He-ba´-ṭoⁿ-he, Stubby-horns. Refers to the old bull who had
    worn his horns down to stumps.

    Hiu´-gthe-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-legs. Refers to the great size of the
    legs of the buffalo bull.

    Hiⁿ-çi´-moⁿ-iⁿ, Brown-hair-walker. Refers to the brown color of
    the calf. Also Çi-ha, Soles.

    I´-hiⁿ-u-ba-doⁿ, Pointed-beard. Refers to the beard of the
    buffalo.

    I´-shka-da-bi, Playful. Refers to the sport afforded the hunter
    by the herds of buffalo. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens of the Omaha
    tribe.)

    I-tha´-noⁿ-ça, Head-them-off. Refers to the heading off of the
    buffalo trying to escape the hunter.

    I´-wa-shkoⁿ, Dependable. Valor name. A man returned from the
    warpath discouraged. On approaching the village he heard the
    Herald singing his praises. He went back, attacked the enemy,
    and won a big victory. Also Shoⁿ-ha-u-ḳi-p̣a-ṭse, Wolf-robe.
    He thought a great deal of this robe, but when he attacked the
    enemy he threw it away and lost it. These two names the warrior
    won in this fight.

    Ḳi-noⁿ´-doⁿ, Springs-forth. Valor name. Also Ṭse-moⁿ´-gi-u-e.
    (Meaning obscure.) Son of Mi´-hoⁿ-ga of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-noⁿ
    gens.

    Louis. Son of P̣a-çi´-do-ba and Mi´-çoⁿ-e.

    Miⁿ´-dse-ḳoⁿ, Bow-string. The bow-string is made of buffalo
    sinew and is of great value to the hunter and warrior. Son of
    Ṭse-do´-a-ṭoⁿ-ga and Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi.

    Moⁿ-ga´-shu-dse or Moⁿ-ga´-shu-e, Dust-makers. Refers to the
    dust raised by the herds of buffalo. Also P̣e´-zhe-u-tha-ha,
    Grass-clings-to-him. Husband of Wa-ṭoⁿ´-i-ça-e of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    Moⁿ-iⁿ´-gthe-doⁿ, Walks-home. Son of Ṭse-do´-a-ṭoⁿ-ga and
    Hiⁿ-i-ḳi-a-bi.

    Moⁿ-zhoⁿ´-u-ga-shoⁿ, Wanderer. Refers to the buffalo that roams
    over the land.

    Ni-ga´-xu-e, Roaring-waters. Refers to the waters disturbed by
    a herd of buffalo crossing a stream. (In the Iⁿ-ḳe´-ça-be gens
    of the Omaha tribe.)

    Noⁿ-ba´-moⁿ-thiⁿ, Two-walking. Refers to two buffalo walking
    side by side. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the Omaha tribe.)
    Husband of Xu-tha´-mi-ṭse-xi of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Noⁿ´-ḳa-a-ba-zha-ṭa, Straddles-the-back. Refers to the packing
    of the buffalo meat on the back of the horse by the hunter.

    Noⁿ´-p̣e-wa-the, Fear-inspiring. This name is used by both this
    and the Ni-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the
    Omaha tribe.)

    Noⁿ-zhiⁿ´-tsi-e, Rises-suddenly. Refers to the alertness of the
    buffalo.

    Oⁿ´-be-çu-zhiⁿ-ga, Small-hips. Refers to the smallness of the
    hips of the buffalo.

    P̣a-çi-do-ba, Four-hills. Refers to the descent of a herd of
    buffalo from a hilltop in four lines. (In the Ḳoⁿ´-çe gens of
    the Omaha tribe.) Husband of Wa-zha´-zhe-mi-ṭse-xi of the Ṭa´
    I-ni-ḳa-shi-ga gens.

    P̣a-çi´-do-ba. Husband of Mi´-çoⁿ-e of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    P̣a´-ṭa-hiⁿ-shku-e, Hairy-head. Refers to the hairy head of the
    buffalo.

    P̣e´-zhe-a-ṭse, Grass-eater. Refers to the eating of grass by
    the buffalo.

    P̣i´-zhi-gthi-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Returns-to-fight. Refers to the enraged
    bull standing to fight the hunter.

    P̣i´-zhi-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-bad-one. Refers to the big bull that is
    always ready to fight. Husband of Gthe-doⁿ´-mi-ṭse-xi of the
    Ni´-ḳa-wa-ḳoⁿ-da-gi gens.

    P̣i´-zhi-ṭoⁿ-ga, Husband of Mary of the O´-poⁿ gens.

    Sha´-be-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Stands-dark. The lone buffalo standing still
    against the horizon. (In the Hoⁿ´-ga gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    The´-çe-xa-ga, Rough-tongue. The tongue of the buffalo is rough.

    Thi-xa´-ba-zhi, Not-chased. Refers to the little calf the
    hunter allows to escape.

    Thi-xa´-bi-a-ḳi-zhiⁿ, Thinks-himself-chased. Refers to the
    fleeing of a buffalo even when he is not pursued by the hunter.

    Thoⁿ´-dse-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-heart.

    Tho´-xe-ga-hi-ge, Tho-xe-chief.

    Tho´-xe-wa-ḳoⁿ-da, The-mystic-Tho-xe.

    Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga, Young-Tho-xe. Also Wa-ṭoⁿ´-iⁿ-ḳi-the,
    Comes-to-view. (A Mi-ḳ’iⁿ´ name.) Refers to the new moon.
    Husband of Mi´-çoⁿ-e of the Wa-ça´-be gens.

    Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga. Husband of Gia´-çoⁿ-ba of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Tho´-xe-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Mischievous-Tho-xe.

    Ṭse´-çe-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-belly. Refers to the great size of the
    bull. Husband of Wa´-ḳoⁿ-ça-moⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Ṭse-çiⁿ´-dse, Buffalo-tail. (The name of a gens in the Omaha
    tribe.)

    Ṭse-do´-a-moⁿ-iⁿ, Walking-bull.

    Ṭse-do´-a-ṭoⁿ-ga, Big-bull. Husband of Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭse-do´-a-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-bull. (In the Ṭse-çiⁿ´-dse gens of
    the Omaha tribe.)

    Ṭse-do´-ga, Buffalo-bull. (In the Hoⁿ´-ga gens of the Omaha
    tribe.)

    Ṭse-moⁿ´-gi-the. (Meaning obscure.)

    Ṭse-p̣a´-zhiⁿ-ga, Little-buffalo-head. Husband of
    Wa-ça´-be-wa-ḳ’u of the Wa-ça´-be gens.

    Ṭse´-thi-ṭsi, Buffalo-ribs. (In the Tha´-ṭa-da gens of the
    Omaha tribe.)

    Ṭse-zhiⁿ´-ga-wa-da-iⁿ-ga, Playful-calf. Refers to the
    playfulness of the buffalo calf. Also Xa-ge´-wa-the,
    Makes-them-weep. (In the Ḳoⁿ´-çe gens of the Omaha tribe.)

    U-ga´-ha-xpa, Bushy-head.

    U-ḳoⁿ´-dsi-noⁿ-zhiⁿ, Stands-alone. Refers to the solitary
    buffalo that stands alone, apart from the herd.

    U-mi´-zhe, Bedding. Refers to the use of the buffalo hide for
    bedding.

    U-ḳi´-p̣a-toⁿ, Rolls-himself. Refers to the rolling of the
    buffalo on the ground. (In the Iⁿ-gthe´-zhi-de gens of the
    Omaha tribe.)

    U-tha´-ga-bi, Famed. Valor name.

    Wa-noⁿ´-ge, Stampede. Refers to the stampeding of a buffalo
    herd.

    Wa´-stse-ge, Strip-of-meat.

    Wa´-u-wi-çi, Jumper. Refers to the leaps of the buffalo when
    charging on the hunter.

    We´-zhi-u-gi-p̣i, Trench-full. Refers to the fullness of the
    fire trench used in jerking meat.


FEMALE

    Boⁿ-giu´-da, Lowing. Refers to the lowing of the herd as heard
    in the distance.

    Boⁿ-giu´-da, same as above. Daughter of Ṭse-do´-a-ṭoⁿ-ga, this
    gens, and Hiⁿ´i-ḳi-a-bi of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Boⁿ-giu-da, same as above. Wife of Ḳoⁿ´-çe-hoⁿ-ga of the
    Hoⁿ´-ga U-ṭa-noⁿ-dsi gens.

    Doⁿ´-a-bi, Gazed-upon. Name applied to first daughter.

    Doⁿ´-a-bi, same as above. Wife of Mi´-da-iⁿ-ga of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Doⁿ´-a-bi, same as above. Wife of Wa-zhiⁿ´-ga-ça-be of the
    Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    I´-ṭoⁿ-moⁿ-iⁿ, meaning uncertain. A Mi´ḳ’iⁿ name. Daughter of
    Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga, this gens, and Mi´-çiⁿ-e of the Wa-ça´-be gens.

    I´-ṭoⁿ-woⁿ-gthoⁿ-bi, One-for-whom-villages-are-built. Daughter
    of Ṭse-p̣a´-zhiⁿ-ga, this gens, and Wa-ça´-be wa-ḳ’o of the
    Wa-ça-be gens.

    Ḳi´-o, wounded. Wife of Ni´-ḳa-i-çi-wa-the of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-noⁿ gens.

    Ni´-ḳa-a-ça, meaning uncertain.

    Ni´-ḳa-a-ça, wife of Ho-wa´-ça-e of the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge
    gens.

    Ni´-ḳoⁿ-a-ça, daughter of Ṭse-çe-ṭoⁿ-ga, this gens, and Wa´-ḳoⁿ
    moⁿ-iⁿ of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    P̣a-hiu´-thi-shoⁿ, Shaggy-head. Name of second daughter in the
    gens.

    P̣a-hiu´-thi-shoⁿ, same as above. Daughter of P̣a-çi´-do-ba,
    this gens, and Mi´-çoⁿ-e of the Hoⁿ-ga gens.

    Tho´-xe-wiⁿ, Tho´-xe-woman.

    Ṭse-çoⁿ´-wiⁿ, White-buffalo-woman. Wife of Toⁿ´-woⁿ-i-hi of the
    Ṭsi-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens. Appears in Hoⁿ´-ga gens of Omaha tribe.

    Ṭse-çoⁿ´-wiⁿ, same as above. Daughter of Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga, this
    gens, and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭse´-hoⁿ-ga-wiⁿ, Sacred-buffalo-woman. Daughter of
    Ṭse-do-a-ṭoⁿ-ga, this gens, and Hiⁿ´-i-ḳi-a-bi of the Ṭsi´-zhu
    Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭse-i´-ḳoⁿ-tha, meaning uncertain.

    Ṭse-mi´-çi, Brown-buffalo-woman. Name of third daughter in gens.

    Ṭse-mi´-çi, daughter of Hiⁿ-çi´-moⁿ-iⁿ, this gens.

    Ṭse-mi´-çi, same as above. Daughter of Tho´-xe-zhiⁿ-ga, this
    gens, and Gia´-çoⁿ-ba of the P̣oⁿ´-ḳa Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Ṭse-wi´-hoⁿ-ga, Buffalo-sacred-cow. Wife of Hoⁿ´-ga-tha-ghtiⁿ
    of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.

    Ṭse-mi´-xtsi, Red-buffalo-woman. Wife of Ṭsi´-zhu-zhiⁿ-ga of
    the Ṭsi´-zhu Wa-shta-ge gens.

    Wa-shiⁿ-wiⁿ, Fat-woman. Daughter of P̣a-çi´-do-ba, this gens,
    and Mi-çoⁿ-e of the Hoⁿ´-ga gens.


[Transcriber's Note:

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.]




