Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 58937-h.htm or 58937-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/58937/58937-h/58937-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/58937/58937-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/maryfrancessewin00frye


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text enclosed by equal signs is in bold face (=bold=).





[Illustration: For all girls who love to make pretty things.

  Jane Eayre Fryer]


THE MARY FRANCES SEWING BOOK

or

Adventures Among the Thimble People

by

JANE EAYRE FRYER

Illustrated by Jane Allen Boyer






The John C. Winston Co.
Philadelphia




CAUTION


The entire contents of this book are protected by the stringent new
copyright law, and all persons are warned not to attempt to reproduce
the text, in whole or in part, or any of the illustrations.

Copyright, 1913, by
Jane Eayre Fryer


      *      *      *      *      *      *

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  THE MARY FRANCES COOK BOOK
  ――OR――
  ADVENTURES AMONG THE KITCHEN PEOPLE


  The Mary Frances Cook Book is the exceptionally clever and
  fascinating story of a little girl who wanted to learn to
  help her mother. Only it is much more than a story. It
  tells in story form how Mary Frances learned to cook. She
  wants to know what all the kitchen pots and pans are for,
  so she asks them. And they tell her―the pots and pans talk.
  The book gives recipes in the simplest, plainest words. It
  describes every operation clearly―just what Mary Frances did,
  and how she learned to avoid mistakes. The book stimulates
  the imagination and creates a desire to follow Mary
  Frances’ example. 8vo. Cloth, 170 pages. Over 200 colored
  illustrations by Margaret G. Hays and Jane Allen Boyer.

  PRICE $1.20 NET

      *      *      *      *      *      *


[Illustration: PREFACE]

DEAR GIRLS:

Many of you already know Mary Frances’ old friends, the Kitchen
People, and have learned to love them. I hope all of you will do so
in time.

This book tells the story of Mary Frances’ new friends, the Thimble
People, who helped her spend a delightful summer vacation at her
Grandmother’s. It tells how she met Sewing Bird, who was a real Fairy
Lady, and the other Thimble People; and how they taught her a lot
of fascinating secrets, and finally took her on a long journey to
Thimble Land, and brought her back safely, after the most marvelous
adventures. Because they proved so helpful and friendly, she wants
you to know them, too.

The Thimble People, like the Kitchen People, are peculiar in that
they can be of little help to those who dislike them; so that, unless
you are prepared to be fond of them, it is best not to seek their
acquaintance.

[Illustration]

Toward those who show indifference or dislike, they
behave in a most contrary manner. For example, Tommy Pin Cushion is a
regular porcupine, and bristles right up instinctively at the least
inkling of dislike. But if he knows you like him, he will roll over
himself to help.

Another thing (and Mary Frances says to be very particular on this
point)―if any little girl, who really wishes to learn to sew, will
follow the lessons exactly as given by the Thimble People, she can
hardly fail to win the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try for her very own.

In the hope that all will achieve this much-to-be-desired end, this
record of Mary Frances’ new adventures is sent out to the girls of
America with the best wishes of

  THE AUTHOR.

  MERCHANTVILLE, N. J.




[Illustration: CONTENTS]

  CHAPTER                                          PAGE

       I. SEWING BIRD                                17

      II. SEWING BIRD BEGINS TO TEACH                26

     III. THE LONG AND SHORT OF BASTING              32

      IV. SEWING BIRD’S SECRET                       40

       V. SEWING BIRD TEASES DICK CANARY             45

      VI. THE STITCH GRANDMA LEARNED                 50

     VII. BLANKET STITCH, AND ITS SISTER             54

    VIII. SEWING BIRD FAIRY LADY                     58

      IX. MAGIC AND MYSTERY                          66

       X. A DOLL’S LAUNDRY BAG                       75

      XI. MR. SILVER THIMBLE AND MR. EMERY BAG       82

     XII. MARY FRANCES’ TREASURE BOX                 89

    XIII. MAKING A DOLL’S APRON                      93

     XIV. A LOAN FROM THE THIMBLE KING               98

      XV. THREE LITTLE KITTENS                      103

     XVI. A SURPRISE FROM MOTHER                    107

    XVII. MARY MARIE’S HANDKERCHIEF                 115

  [Illustration]

  CHAPTER                                          PAGE

   XVIII. A NIGHTIE FOR HER LITTLE NAP              125

     XIX. HER BATH-ROBE                             135

      XX. MA CHINE                                  145

     XXI. AUNT MARIA MAKES A VISIT                  159

    XXII. A RUINED DRESS                            175

   XXIII. THE FLANNEL PET                           182

    XXIV. THE WHITE PET                             191

     XXV. CAN THE DOLLY TALK                        201

    XXVI. A FUR-LINED CAPE                          212

   XXVII. A “DRESS-UP” DRESS                        217

  XXVIII. A PARTY DRESS                             224

    XXIX. MARY MARIE GOES AUTOMOBILING              234

     XXX. MARY MARIE GOES IN BATHING                243

    XXXI. MUFFS AND CAPS AND PRETTIEST TRAPS        248

   XXXII. WHO STOLE MARY MARIE’S CLOTHES            254

  XXXIII. MARY FRANCES VISITS THIMBLE LAND          258

   XXXIV. WHAT WAS IN THE FAIRY BAG                 269

    XXXV. MARY FRANCES AT HOME                      278




[Illustration: LIST OF PATTERNS]

                                                 PAGE

   1. DOLL’S LAUNDRY BAG                          67

   2. DOLL’S APRON                                93

   3. DOLL’S HANDKERCHIEF                        119

   4. DOLL’S NIGHTGOWN                           127

   5. DOLL’S BATH-ROBE                           136

   6. DOLL’S KIMONO                              154

   7. DOLL’S DRESSING SACK                       156

   8. DOLL’S PINAFORE                            171

   9. DOLL’S MORNING DRESS                       177

  10. DOLL’S FLANNEL PETTICOAT                   186

  11. DOLL’S UNDERWAIST                          188

  12. DOLL’S LAWN PETTICOAT                      195

  13. DOLL’S DRAWERS                             198

  14. DOLL’S ROMPERS                             208

  15. DOLL’S BLOOMERS                            210

  16. DOLL’S LEGGINGS                            211

  17. DOLL’S FUR-LINED CAPE                      215

  18. DOLL’S AFTERNOON DRESS                     219

  [Illustration]

                                                PAGE

  19. DOLL’S GUIMPE                              228

  20. DOLL’S PARTY DRESS                         229

  21. DOLL’S AUTOMOBILE COAT                     238

  22. DOLL’S AUTOMOBILE BONNET                   240

  23. DOLL’S BATHING SUIT                        244

  24. DOLL’S FUR MUFF AND TIPPET                 249

  25. DOLL’S SUN BONNET                          250

  26. DOLL’S WORK BAG                            251

  27. DOLL’S RAIN COAT                           269

  28. DOLL’S POLO CAP                            270

  29. DOLL’S WEDDING DRESS                       271

  30. LADY’S WORK BAG                            273

  31. LADY’S BELT                                274

  32. BABY’S BIB                                 274

  33. GIRL’S COLLAR                              275




[Illustration: INSTRUCTIONS ]

                                                PAGE

  1. TO OUTFIT A WORK BASKET                      27

  2. MAKING A KNOT                                29

  3. EVEN BASTING                                 36

  4. UNEVEN BASTING                               38

  5. RUNNING STITCH                               40

  6. STITCHING                                    41

  7. HALF BACK-STITCHING                          47

  8. CATCH STITCHING                              48

  9. OVERHANDING                                  52

  10. OVERCASTING                                 52

  11. HEMMING STITCH                              53

  12. BLANKET STITCH                              54

  13. BUTTON-HOLE STITCH                          55

  14. CANVAS SAMPLER                              56

  15. CROSS STITCHING                             57

  16. GRAND SAMPLER ON CANVAS                     59

  17. HEMMING ON MUSLIN                           73

  18. NEEDLES AND THREADS                         76

  [Illustration]

                                                PAGE

  19. ABOUT CLOTH―WEAVING AND SPINNING            92

  20. GATHERING                                   94

  21. STROKING OF GATHERS                         95

  22. SETTING GATHERS                             96

  23. KENSINGTON OUTLINE STITCH                  104

  24. HEM-STITCHING                              119

  25. SEWING ON LACE EDGING                      120

  26. MAKING A FELL                              122

  27. FRENCH SEAM                                130

  28. TO SEW ON HOOKS AND EYES                   139

  29. TO MAKE EYELET LOOPS                       140

  30. TO SEW ON LOOPS OF TAPE                    142

  31. FEATHER STITCHING                          157

  32. SEWING ON BUTTONS                          160

  33. BUTTON-HOLES                               167

  34. MAKING A PLACKET                           179

  35. FELLING ON FLANNEL                         187

  36. MAKING TUCKS                               196

  37. WHIPPED RUFFLE                             199

  38. FRENCH KNOTS                               231

  39. EYELETS                                    245

  40. SLIP STITCH                                250

  [Illustration]

                                                PAGE

  41. FRENCH HEMMING ON DAMASK                   275

  42. DARNING STOCKINGS                          275

  43. DARNING WOOLEN GOODS                       276

  44. PATCHING ON GINGHAM                        276

  45. PATCHING ON FLANNEL                        277

  46. SPIDER’S WEB                               277


[Illustration:
  Little Marie has lost her clothes
  And can’t tell where to find them;
  Let them alone,―and they’ll come home
  With all their buttons behind them.]




[Illustration: THIMBLE PEOPLE

Sewing Bird.
Mr. Silver Thimble.
Mr. Emery Bag.
Tommy (Tomato) Pin Cushion.
Scissors Shears.
Pen Cil.
Needle Book.
BodKin.
Ma Chine.
Work Basket.
Bees Wax.
Yard Stick.
Common Ordinary Pin.
Button-hole Scissors.
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try]




[Illustration: CHAPTER I]

CHAPTER I

SEWING BIRD


“CHEER―UP!” sang a sweet little voice.

[Illustration: Dick seldom sang]

Mary Frances looked at the canary; but Dick was very busily preening
his feathers, and Dick seldom sang.

“Cheer up!” gurgled again the sweet bird voice.

Mary Frances was certain this time that it was not Dick.

Maybe it was a bird outside!

She looked out of the sewing-room window. No, not a single feather
was in sight. All the birds were doubtless in their little nests, or
hiding close in the barn to keep themselves warm in such a rain.

“Dick!” said Mary Frances, “Dick, did you speak?”

Dick only ducked his head again for a seed, and snapped off the shell
with his strong little bill.

“Peep! Peep! Peep!” sang a bird’s voice, as though inviting Mary
Frances to a game.

“I’ll play ‘Hide and Seek,’” thought the little girl.

[Illustration: “Dick, did you speak?”]

“Where are you, Birdie?” she asked aloud; and, throwing Angie on the
rocking chair, began to search.

Another soft little “Peep!” drew her near her grandmother’s
work-basket.

“Why!” she cried, “I could easily believe the voice comes from
Grandma’s basket!”

“Peep! Peep! Peep! Peep!” the bird voice answered excitedly, as Mary
Frances leaned over.

“Why! Why! Why!” she exclaimed. “If it isn’t―if it isn’t Grandma’s
Sewing Bird! You dear little thing! Can you talk, too?” lifting her
out. “I never thought of you!”

[Illustration: Peep! Peep! Peep!]

  “Set me up
     Upon the table,
   Then I’ll sing
     As I am able,
   Chir! Chir!
     Chirp! Chirp!”

answered Sewing Bird.

Mary Frances carried her over to the sewing table and fastened her
carefully to the edge, just as she had seen her grandmother do.

[Illustration: Throwing Angie in the rocking chair.]

The other Thimble People kept perfectly still, wondering what would
happen next.

“Do you know―you remind me of the Kitchen Folks, Birdie,” said the
little girl.

[Illustration: “The Thimble People!”]

  “The Kitchen Folks! The Kitchen Folks!
   Of all the joyous, joyous jokes!
   The Thimble People’s nearest kin―
   Best friends we are―have always been,”

sang the little bird.

“The Thimble People!” exclaimed Mary Frances; “why, who are they? Are
there many Thimble People? And what relation are they to the Kitchen
People? Will you tell me all about them? And will they be my little
friends?”

  “Tut! Tut!
   So many questions, little maid,
   I cannot answer, I’m afraid―
   But I can say, without a joke,
   Your friends will be the Thimble Folk.”

[Illustration: Sang the little bird]

“Oh, I’m so glad! My, I wouldn’t have missed knowing them for
anything. Why, I feel as though I’ve known you for―for―ages!”

[Illustration: ‘Except maybe a mouse’]

  “I was so afraid
     You wouldn’t find me!
   And then, of course,
     You couldn’t mind me,
           Chirp!”

“Oh,” said Mary Frances, “wouldn’t that have been dreadful! I was so
lonely and dreary that I almost wanted to go home instead of staying
here at Grandma’s.”

  “Are you alone
   In the house,
   Except maybe a mouse?
         Cheerp!”

asked Sewing Bird.

“No,” said Mary Frances, “Katie’s in the kitchen,―but she’s very
busy, and won’t bother with me, and my Grandma is out this afternoon,
calling on some old ladies.”

[Illustration: “Katie’s in the kitchen”]

  “Oh, you poor
     Little lonely girl!
   It sets my head
     In quite a whirl;
   Let me sit here
     On this table,
   And comfort you
     As I am able.”

[Illustration: “Billy is a first-class scout”]

“Well, you see, Sewing Bird,” began Mary Frances gratefully, “Mother
is never very strong, and Father had to go to California on business;
and he thought wouldn’t it be nice to take Mother with him. So I’m
here at my dear Grandma’s for the long summer vacation; and brother
Billy is camping with the Boy Scouts; Billy is a first-class scout,
you know.”

“Yes,” said Sewing Bird, pretending to look wise, “they have them in
Thimble Land.”

“Have what?” asked Mary Frances.

“Why, Boy Scouts, of course―in Thimble Land!”

“Thimble Land!” said Mary Frances; “my, that must be where the
Thimble People come from! Where is it?”

[Illustration: Pretending to look wise]

  “A long way there―
     Perhaps you’ll go
   Some day, if you will
     Learn to know
   That what we teach
     Is sew! sew! sew!”

[Illustration: “Sew! Sew! Sew!”]

“So! So! _So!?_” asked Mary Frances, looking puzzled, “What’s so?”

“Sew! Sew! Sew!” sang Sewing Bird, looking sharply at her with bright
little eyes.

“Sew! Sew! Sew! Sew! Sew! Sew! Sew!”

“Sew!”

“Sew! Sew!” she fairly shrieked.

“Yes,” said Mary Frances wondering at her excitement, “of course it’s
so.”

  “I mean sew
     With a thimble;
   I mean sew
     And be nimble,”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: Mary Frances, looking puzzled]

“Oh, ho,” laughed Mary Frances. “You mean _sew_! How lovely! If I
only knew how to really, truly sew! I do, just a little.”

  “If you’d like to learn to sew;
   To baste and bind; tie a bow;
   Dress a dolly, head to toe,
   We can teach you how―”

[Illustration: “Dress a dolly, head to toe.”]

“Can you, really? Really and truly?” cried Mary Frances. “How
perfectly dear! Oh, please do, please begin! Angie, poor child, needs
so many clothes. When she went to the Tea Party, she spilled cocoa
all over herself, and it spoiled all her lovely, lovely dress. It
has always grieved me since. She’s so tattered and forlorn. Will you
teach me how to sew?”

  “I will most gladly; and quite true,
   I’ll tell you what you’d better do―
   Get your Grandma every day
   To let you have this room for play.”

[Illustration: “I will most gladly”]

“Oh, yes, we’ll have the sewing-room for a play-room, Sewing Bird;
and you give me lessons! Must they be secret―like the Kitchen
People’s lessons? And can you teach me? Oh, how happy I am! I wonder
if I can surprise my dear mother. Can I learn to sew for my dolly
this vacation?”

[Illustration: “A pinafore”]

  “Why, certainly, dear little Miss,
   You can learn to make all this:
   A pin-a-fore, some under-clothes,
   A little ’kerchief for her nose;
   Kimono, bloomers, little cap,
   A nightie for her little nap;
   A dress for morn, for afternoon,
   A dress for parties, not too soon;
   A little cape, a little bonnet―
   Perhaps with roses fastened on it;―
   A nice warm coat to keep from chill,
   A dainty sack, in case she’s ill:
   All this and more we’ll gladly teach,
   If you will do and follow each―

will you?”

“I will,” laughed Mary Frances, “but each what?”

[Illustration: “Some underclothes”]

  “Each little lesson, one by one,
   Then, after each hard stitch is done,
   Remember―‘patience brings reward!’”

“What’s ‘patience’?” asked the little girl.

“Why, ‘patience’? Patience is Mary Frances’ middle name―Mary P.
Frances,―see?”

“My, isn’t that a nice name! Mary Patience Frances. And what’s
‘reward’?” laughed the little girl.

“‘Reward’? Reward,” said Sewing Bird, “is Angie all dressed up in the
things we’ll make.”

“Oh, I’d love to begin at once―can’t we?”

Sewing Bird gaily nodded her bright, shiny little head.

“Goody! Goody! Won’t Mother be surprised?” said Mary Frances. “I’ll
run and get my little work-basket that Grandma gave me.”

[Illustration: ‘Reward’ is Angie all dressed up in the things we’ll
make]




[Illustration: CHAPTER II]

CHAPTER II

SEWING BIRD BEGINS TO TEACH


THEN Sewing Bird began:

  “Little fingers, thin and nimble,
   Fit to one, a little thimble;
   Right hand―finger, number two―
   Put the hat on,―that will do.”

[Illustration: “Put the hat on”]

Mary Frances put her thimble on the second finger of her right hand.

“I knew that much, Sewing Bird,” she laughed.

  “What else do you know,
   If that much is so?
   Chur! Chur! Chur!”

sang Sewing Bird, hopping up and down on one leg.

“Why, I know how to thread my needle,” said Mary Frances, to whom the
talking of Sewing Bird seemed just as natural as the talking of Tea
Kettle and the other Kitchen People.

[Illustration: Sang Sewing Bird, hopping up and down.]

[Illustration: To thread a needle]

“I know, too, that you should put the end of the thread broken off
next the spool through the eye of the needle, so that it will not
kink.”

  “Very good,
     And very true;―
   What in your basket,
     Pray, have you?”

asked Sewing Bird.

Then Mary Frances answered, “These are the articles needed, my
Grandma said,


1.―TO OUTFIT A WORK BASKET

  1. Spools of cotton, white, Nos. 36, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80; also one
  of red, No. 50. One spool of basting cotton.

  2. One little strawberry emery bag to brighten and sharpen
  needles.

  3. Pins.

  4. A piece of beeswax.

  5. A tape measure.

  6. A pair of scissors.

  7. A paper of ground-down needles, Nos. 5’s―10’s.

  8. Some unbleached muslin.

  9. Thimble.

[Illustration: To Outfit a Work Basket]

and, oh, look! here is a large piece of Java canvas, and a package
of blunt tapestry or zephyr needles, No. 19, and some red D. M. C.
working cotton, No. 8, that Grandma put in here yesterday.”

[Illustration: Zephyr needles and working cotton.]

“Good,” sang Sewing Bird,

  “Oh, that is fine!
     Is fine, indeed!
   The zephyr needle
     Is what we’ll need.”

“Oh,” laughed Mary Frances, “I can thread that―you turn the thread
over the needle, double, because a fuzzy end would not go through
even this long eye. Then hold it tight between the thumb and finger,
and push the needle over the double thread―this way. Mother taught
me that.”

  “Needles and pins! Needles and pins!
   This is where your lesson begins!
     Now, thread your needle,
       And knot your thread;
     If you know how―
       Please do as I’ve said.”

[Illustration: To thread a zephyr needle]

“Yes,” laughed Mary Frances. “I know how to knot my thread; I’ll show
you, after I get this needle threaded―now!”


2.―MAKING A KNOT

  1. I wind the thread around the tip of the first finger of my
  left hand.

  2. I press it with my thumb and roll the thread downward to the
  tip end of my finger―so!

  3. Then I bring the second finger over the thread on the thumb.

  4. Then draw the thread tight with the right hand as I hold it.”

[Illustration: To make a knot]

  “Good! You’ll easily
     Learn to sew!
   How many stitches
     Do you know?”

“Let me see,” pondered Mary Frances; “there are basting, and running,
and hemming!”

“Good!” exclaimed Sewing Bird, in a very nearly human voice, but much
more musical and softer.

“Good! Now I’ll name over all the principal stitches:

[Illustration: “Good!” exclaimed Sewing Bird]

  Even and uneven basting
  Running
  Back-stitching
  Half back-stitching
  Overcasting
  Overhanding
  Catch-stitching
  Button-hole stitch
  Darning
  Blanket stitch

[Illustration: “Are you home already?”]

“My,” said Mary Frances. “I had no idea there were that many! I
wonder―will I ever learn them all?”

“Oh, yes!” Sewing Bird assured her, “if you come for a lesson
whenever you can.”

“Indeed I will!” said Mary Frances, “and how I’ll thank you, dear
little birdie.”

Just then the door opened.

“My dear little girl,” said Grandma, “how are you? What a dull day!”

“Are you home already, Grandma?” asked Mary Frances. “I had no idea
it was time for you to come.”

“Ah, my dear, you’ve not been lonely,” said Grandma―then discovering
Sewing Bird on the table, “You’ve been playing with my old-fashioned
sewing bird, I see. Many a year this pretty little beak has held
Grandma’s long seams and hems while she sewed them.”

[Illustration: “My dear little girl,” said Grandma.]

“I think she’s lovely!” exclaimed Mary Frances.

“I love her, too, dear,” said Grandma, a far-away look coming in her
eyes.

“The first time she ever helped me,” she added softly, “was with my
wedding dress. Yes, I love her, too, dear.”

“Peep!” said a little bird voice.

“Dick,” said Grandma, shaking her finger, “Dick, you surely aren’t
jealous of the little sewing bird!”

[Illustration: The first time she ever helped me was with my wedding
dress”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER III]

CHAPTER III

THE LONG AND SHORT OF BASTING.


“GOOD-BYE, dear,” said Grandma, taking leave of Mary Frances a day or
two later. “You may play in the garden while I’m gone, if you want
to.”

[Illustration: “Good bye, dear.”]

“I think I’ll stay in, Grandma, if you don’t mind,” answered Mary
Frances, not quite daring to mention her sewing lessons, “I have a
sort of an engagement.”

“Well! Well!” laughed Grandma, “so grown up already? You have been
out every day lately―I think perhaps you’ll like to play in the
sewing-room.”

“I hope you’ll have a lovely time, Nanny,” said Mary Frances as her
grandma closed the door.

“I wonder if Sewing Bird will be ready for the lesson,” she thought
as she skipped up the stairs to the sewing-room.

“Sewing Bird! Sewing Bird!” she whispered.

[Illustration: “I hope you’ll have a lovely time”]

  “Oh, that’s the call
     I love to hear;
   I’m always ready―
     Never fear!”

came the sweet singing voice of Sewing Bird.

Mary Frances was delighted.

“I’m so glad you remembered, dear little bird,” said she. “Where are
you?”

  “Taking a rest,
   In my dear little nest.
       Chur! Chur!”

[Illustration: “Taking a rest in my dear little nest”]

came the answer.

“Of course,―the basket’s your nest,” laughed Mary Frances, carrying
Sewing Bird to her place on the table.

“I asked Grandma if I could have the sewing-room for my play-room,
and she said, ’Certainly, my dear, you may―anything to keep you
happy!’”

“Twitter, twitter, twitter, twit,” sang Sewing Bird―and somehow Mary
Frances knew she meant, “I’m so happy, too.”

[Illustration: “Twitter, twitter, twitter, twit”]

  “I love to sit
     And sing and sing―
   But lesson time
     Is on the wing:
   Miss Never-Try
     Never can do;
   Miss Never-Begin
     Never gets thru.”

[Illustration: “I love to sit And sing and sing”]

“Oh, dear me! Sewing Bird, I want to begin right away,” said Mary
Frances. “I hope to get so much done!”

“Well,” said Sewing Bird, “we will begin at once with that pretty
canvas and Turkey-red working cotton (D. M. C. No. 8). You may cut
some pieces of canvas seven inches long and one and one-half inches
wide. Work on the sewing table―that will be easier.”

“Oh, I know,” guessed Mary Frances, “the Java canvas is to learn the
stitches on.”

“Yes,” said Sewing Bird, “you use one of these pieces for each new
stitch; the regular open spaces in the canvas will help us so much.”

[Illustration: “I want to begin right away”]

“My needle’s all ready from the last lesson,” said Mary Frances,
holding up her threaded needle, “and my thread is knotted.”

[Illustration: “My needle’s all ready”]

  “Little Miss! little Miss!
     Not so long a thread!
   Measure it only
     From your hand to your head.”

“Oh,” said Mary Frances, breaking off some thread. “Thank you, I
didn’t know that. I suppose it is easier to use only an arm’s length
of thread.”

“Yes,” said Sewing Bird. “Now, it would be well to open the skein of
cotton.”

Mary Frances did so.

“Next clip both ends through―and you will have several threads of
the same length.”

“That’s so much easier,” said Mary Frances, “than cutting it each
time.”

“Now, for a new kind of puzzle,” said Sewing Bird. “Take one piece
of canvas already cut. For convenience we will call the regular open
spaces in the canvas, ‘holes.’”

“Yes,” said Mary Frances. “I understand, dear Sewing Bird; but please
tell me the puzzle.”

[Illustration: “Now, for a new kind of puzzle”]

   “A puzzle then it soon shall be,
    A puzzle which ne’er puzzled me,
    A puzzle which I’ll let you see―
    Its name is


3.―EVEN BASTING (ON CANVAS)

[Illustration: “A puzzle which I’ll let you see.”]

  Cut canvas 7 inches by 1-1/2 inches.

  1. Thread needle and knot thread.

  2. Count five holes down from upper right hand end of canvas and
  four holes to the left.

  3. Put needle in this hole, pointing downward.

  4. Push needle toward the left under two threads, upward through
  second hole; pull through.

  5. Now, again, over two threads under two threads; pull through.

  6. Finish the row. Fasten thread by taking two stitches over each
  other in the same holes at the end. Cut off the thread.

“That’s not much of a puzzle,” thought Mary Frances, sewing carefully.

“Why is it called Even Basting?” asked Sewing Bird.

“Because the stitches are of the same length,” said Mary Frances.

[Illustration: Even Basting]

    “So wise you are―
      Soon you will be
    Quite a little bit
      Too wise for me,”

sang Sewing Bird.

“Ho, ho!” laughed Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “Oh, I know why.”]

“You may wonder why the knot and the finishing threads are on the
right side,” continued Sewing Bird.

“Oh, I know why,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Because basting stitches
are used only to hold the work in place until it is really sewed,
then they are easily pulled out if the knot and end are on the right
side.”

   “Bless my feathers,
      And bless my eye!
    Soon you’ll know
      As much as I!”

This pleased Mary Frances very much; but she said, “I don’t know―for
I have no idea what comes next, my dear little teacher.”

[Illustration: “Soon you’ll know As much as I!”]

   “Oh, dear me!
      Our time we’re wasting,
    The next stitch is―


4.―UNEVEN BASTING (ON CANVAS)

[Illustration: “That’s all for to-day”]

  1. Commence as in Even Basting.

  2. Point needle downward, and bring it up through next hole.

  3. Count three holes, put needle in downward and bring up next
  hole―‘under one thread, over three’ to end of the row.

  4. Finish as in Even Basting.

“That wasn’t very hard,” said Mary Frances, holding up the canvas for
Sewing Bird to see.

Then sang Sewing Bird:

   “That’s all for to-day,―
      Put things away;
    And, now, little lady,
      Good-day, good-day!”

[Illustration: Uneven Basting]

As Mary Frances went down the stairs, she caught the sound of her
name. Her grandmother was talking.

“That’s a wonderful child,” she was saying. “She’s no bother at all.
She spends hours in the sewing-room, playing with her dolls, just as
happy as can be!”

“Dear Nanny!” thought Mary Frances, “I wish I could explain about
everything―maybe the Thimble People will let me some day.”

[Illustration: Next clip both ends through―and you will have threads
of the same length]




[Illustration: CHAPTER IV]

CHAPTER IV

SEWING BIRD’S SECRET


MARY FRANCES held up her canvas at the beginning of the next lesson,
saying:

“Now, I know which of these stitches is which; and I believe I am
ready to learn the next, my little teacher!”

“The next,” said Sewing Bird, “is


5.―RUNNING STITCH ON CANVAS

[Illustration: “Ouch! That hurts my fingers”]

  1. From under side of canvas, point needle upward, bringing knot
  on wrong side.

  2. Point needle downward through next hole, and upward through
  next. Pull through.

  3. Finish row, by taking several in-and-out stitches on the
  needle, then pulling through.

  4. Turn to wrong side, and fasten by taking three stitches in
  same hole―this is the ‘in-and-out-the-windows’ stitch.”

“Ouch!” cried Mary Frances. “That hurts my fingers.”

“Of course, that is why we have thimbles. Be sure to use the
knighted soldier finger,―and push the needle with its thimble cap,”
said Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: Running Stitch]

[Illustration: “Exactly right, And quite bewitching”]

“This way?” asked Mary Frances, holding up her little hand.

Then Sewing Bird answered with bright eyes sparkling,

   “Exactly right,
      And quite bewitching;
    And needed much
      In learning


6.―STITCHING (ON CANVAS)

(Also called Back-stitching)

  1. Enter needle into canvas as for Running.

  2. Take one running stitch, bringing needle out on right side.

  3. Point needle downward through the hole to the right of the one
  where the working cotton came out.

  4. Push needle under two threads: pull through.

  5. Repeat to end of row.

  6. Fasten as in running stitch.

“Is that well done?” asked Mary Frances, holding up her first two
stitches.

[Illustration: Stitching]

“Oh, my, no!” said Sewing Bird. “You’ve gotten the thread all
twisted. Please unthread your needle and take out the work. Then try
once more.”

[Illustration: “Dear me!” sighed Mary Frances]

“Dear me!” sighed Mary Frances, “one can’t be perfect before one
learns!”

“Try! Try again!” sang Sewing Bird, flapping her wings,

   “It is the Thimble People’s pride
    That they have ever, always, tried:
    Whenever they fail,―this is no tale,
    As you can easily guess,―
    They twist the failure round about,
    They twist and turn it inside out;
    Then drop it down a big, black hole,
    Discovered in back of the North Pole,―
    And up it jumps―Success!”

“My, I wish my failures would do that! Maybe they will,” mused Mary
Frances, finishing the row of stitching very carefully. “Oh, there
comes Grandma up the street!”

[Illustration: “Try! Try again!”]

   “Our lesson is
      Now at an end,―
    That’s all to-day,
      My little friend,”

just then sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “Our lesson is Now at an end”]

“I forgot to ask,” said Mary Frances, “May I show Grandma, or tell
her about―about our lessons?”

   “That I already
      Should have shown;
    I cannot sing
      Where people grown
    Can hear: if they hear now
      Or even ever,
    I may become
      A Never-Never!”

“Oh, ho,” smiled Mary Frances, softly smoothing the little bird. “I’m
so glad I haven’t told. I am certainly glad, dear little Teacher
Bird―I don’t want you to be a Never-Never,―whatever that is.”

[Illustration: “Oh, ho! I’m so glad I haven’t told”]

   “A secret let
      Our secret be―
    Too much for one,
    Enough for two,
    And not enough
      For three,”

sang Sewing Bird wisely. Suddenly―

   “Say no more,
      Oh, say no more!
    I hear your Grandma
      At the door!”

fluttered the little bird; and Mary Frances quickly put away her work.

Grandma smiled when she saw Sewing Bird on the table.

“How you love my little helpful bird, don’t you, dear?” she asked.

“I love her with all my heart,” said Mary Frances.

[Illustration: How you love my little helpful bird,
don’t you, dear?”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER V]

CHAPTER V

SEWING BIRD TEASES DICK CANARY


MARY FRANCES heard this through the sewing-room door:

[Illustration: “Peep! sweet, sw-e-et! Che-e-ep!”]

   “Great kind of bird,
    Upon my word!
      Who cannot do a thing
    But sing and eat,
    And then sing sweet,
      And then again sing-sing.”

“Peep! Sweet, sw-e-et! Che-e-ep!” sang Dick Canary.

   “Of course, you have a pretty voice;
    Of course, you love to make a noise―
    If this rhyme sounds a bit contrary,
    It’s good enough for a canary;
    But, Dick, what I’d really like to know,
    Is this: why don’t you learn to sew?”

[Illustration: “Great kind of a bird, Upon my word!”]

Then Mary Frances stepped in.

“Oh, Sewing Bird,” she said, “I didn’t think you could be such a
tease.”

[Illustration: “And hold some sewing for his Miss”]

   “Good afternoon!
      ‘Tease,’ did you say?
    I wasn’t teasing―
      It was only play:
    I thought perhaps that pretty bird
    Would listen to a little word,
    And hold some sewing for his Miss―
    The way I can; See, Dick―like this!”

holding up a piece of goods in her glistening beak.

“Oh, no,” laughed Mary Frances. “I fear Dick would never be able to
understand such a useful use of his bill―he’s no tailor-bird!”

[Illustration: “Oh, no,―he’s no tailor-bird”]

   “Of course, it
      Truly must be so―
    He certainly could
      Not learn to sew;
   I see that he
     Is surely meant,
   Only to be
     An ornament,”

sang Sewing Bird. “But our next lesson―is your canvas ready, child?
Yes? This time I’m going to count by threads instead of holes, when I
give directions for


7.―HALF BACK STITCHING ON CANVAS

[Illustration: “Curiosity,” smiled Mary Frances]

  1. Commence as in Stitching.

  2. One running stitch, under two threads.

  3. Point needle downward through hole to the right of hole from
     which the cotton hangs; under three threads: pull through.

  4. Repeat to end of row. Fasten.”

“There!” said Mary Frances, finishing the row. “That seems like ‘two
steps backward and one forward,’ or rather, ‘two forward and one
backward.’”

“That’s about the way it is!” said Sewing Bird. “But half
back-stitching and back-stitching are both very strong stitches. Why,
when your grandma was little, she stitched all seams by hand. Sewing
machines were a great cu-cur―”

“Curiosity,” smiled Mary Frances.

[Illustration: Half back stitching]

“Peep―peep,” giggled Dick Canary.

[Illustration: “Peep― peep”]

“Thank you, Miss Mary Frances,” said Sewing Bird,

   “Perhaps that little yellow bird
    Thought I didn’t know the word;
    It’s funny that it seems a joke
    When anybody stops to choke―
    Ahem! Ahem! Ahem! Ahack!
    Pat-me-on-the-back!
    Pat-me-on-the-back! Quick!”

“Better?” asked Mary Frances, smiling to herself, and patting the
little bird’s back.

After a minute she said, “Excuse me, but is―the next stitch―is the
next stitch a fancy one?”

“It is!” said Sewing Bird, “and is called


8.―CATCH STITCHING ON CANVAS

  1. At left hand end of canvas, count four holes down and four to
  the right.

  2. From under side, point needle upward: pull through.

  3. Count three holes down and three to the right. Point needle
  down and under this, one hole to the left: pull through.

  4. Count four holes to the right of first stitch. Point needle
  down through next hole to the left: pull through.

[Illustration: Catch Stitching]

[Illustration: “Of course, you have a pretty voice.”]

“Is that right?” asked Mary Frances.

“My, no,” said Sewing Bird. “That is all wrong. Hold the work here
near my beak. There, let the thread hang this way:

“Now, pull it through. In taking the next stitch, let the thread hang
this way:

“There, that is better.”

“Oh, I see, now,” said Mary Frances. “Isn’t that a beautiful stitch!”

“Yes,” said Sewing Bird,―then, suddenly,

   “Beware! Beware!
    Beware! Beware!
    I hear your Grandma
    On the stair―
        Good-bye!”

[Illustration: “Of course, you have a pretty voice.”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER VI]

CHAPTER VI

THE STITCH GRANDMA LEARNED


MARY FRANCES stopped on the stairs to listen.

“Surely,” she thought, “Sewing Bird is talking with some one. I
wonder if it’s one of the Thimble People. Oh, I do hope so!” and, as
she tripped into the sewing-room, she asked,

[Illustration: “What’s that I heard?”]

“Oh, Sewing Bird, what’s that I heard as I came up the stair? It
really doesn’t matter much―for Grandma wouldn’t care.”

   “I cannot tell you what you heard,
      My dearest little Miss;
    But listen to a wisdom-word,
      For I can tell you this:
    If many times you make up rhymes,
      You may become a little bird,”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “I cannot tell you what you heard.”]

“Oh,” laughed Mary Frances. “Caught myself making a rhyme;―but
I don’t want to become a little birdie, even though they are so
dear,―besides, I don’t have wings.”

“No,” said Sewing Bird. “I don’t suppose you do want to be a
birdie―for many reasons;―but the most important must be that little
birds do not have hands!”

[Illustration: “Hands are so wonderful!”]

“Hands are so wonderful!” said Mary Frances, “they can do so many
things. They are pincers, hammers, wedges, and yet they can do the
most dainty, delicate work.”

“Yes,” said Sewing Bird, “they come in handy!”

“Oh, ho, hee-hee!” laughed Mary Frances.

“Chirp, chirp!” twittered Dick Canary.

   “Oh, Dick! oh, Dick!
      What lots of fun!
    Do you pretend
      To see a pun?”

asked Sewing Bird. “But now to learn

[Illustration: Hemming Stitch]


9.―OVERHANDING ON CANVAS

[Illustration: Overhanding]

  1. Count six holes down and four from right hand end. Put needle
  in from under side: pull through.

  2. Count one hole to the left. Find the hole above it. Point
  needle downward through the upper hole―bring it up to right side
  through the under hole.

  3. Finish row and fasten thread on wrong side, by running thread
  through the last few stitches.


10.―OVERCASTING ON CANVAS

  1. Count one hole from top of canvas and two in from end.

  2. Commence as for Overhanding.

  3. Bring needle out two holes to the left of first stitch.

  4. Fasten as in Overhanding.

  Overcasting stitch is used to finish raw edges of material to
  keep from fraying.

“The next stitch is the first stitch your grandmother learned to
make,” said Sewing Bird. “Her little fingers got so tired and sore
trying to make tiny little bits of stitches on muslin, that you may
be glad you are to learn on canvas.”

[Illustration: Overcasting]


11.―HEMMING STITCH ON CANVAS

  1. Six rows from top―four over to left. Needle up from wrong
  side: pull through.

  2. On row of holes below, one hole to left, point needle down,
  bring it up in first row of holes, two holes to the left of first
  stitch.

  3. Hood canvas over the first finger. Finish row.

  4. Fasten as in Overcasting.

“Is that all there is to hemming?” asked Mary Frances happily.

“No, little Miss, that is just a ‘first beginning,’ as my grandmother
used to say. Some day I hope you will make hemming stitches so small
that they will scarcely show―on a dolly’s apron.”

“Oh, how perfectly lovely!” cried Mary Frances. “I can scarcely wait!
Will it be long?”

“That all depends, my little friend―”

“Upon me,” said Mary Frances. “I’ll work very in-dus-tri-ous-ly, dear
little teacher.”

[Illustration: But the most important must be
that little birds do not have hands]




[Illustration: CHAPTER VII]

CHAPTER VII

BLANKET STITCH AND ITS SISTER


“NOW, Sewing Bird,” began Mary Frances the next lesson afternoon,
“let’s not talk any, but―”

“Let us get right to our lesson,” said Sewing Bird, “which is an
edge-finishing stitch, named


12.―BLANKET STITCH

[Illustration: “Let us get to our lesson”]

  1. At left hand end of canvas four holes down and four to right,
  from under side bring needle to right side.

  2. Hold thread under thumb. One hole to the right, point needle
  down, bringing it up in hole two threads below: pull through.
  Finish row.

  3. Fasten as in Overcasting.

  4. Repeat this on lower edge of canvas.

“Good!” she said, as Mary Frances finished following the directions,
“Now, for a stitch many grown women do not know how to make―a
beautiful stitch:

[Illustration: Blanket Stitch]


13.―BUTTONHOLE STITCH ON CANVAS

[Illustration: “Oh look! dear Sewing Bird”]

  1. Five holes down―four from left hand end, from wrong side,
  bring needle to right side.

  2. Through hole below this, point needle down, and up through the
  one from which the thread hangs. Do not pull through.

  3. Take hold of the two threads in the eye of the needle, bring
  them toward you around under the point of the needle. Let them
  rest there.

  4. Pull needle through.

  5. With left thumb on the stitch, pull the thread with the right
  hand tightly down to the edge of the canvas.

  6. Repeat to end of row.

“Oh, look! dear Sewing Bird,” cried Mary Frances, holding up
her work, “I really do believe that is the way Mother makes a
button-hole! She said she would show me how to do it very soon. How
glad I am I know that stitch!”

“Yes,” said Sewing Bird. “Won’t she be surprised! You know eleven
stitches now.”

“Why, so I do!” exclaimed Mary Frances, counting her little samplers
of work.

[Illustration: Buttonhole Stitch]

“Now,” said Sewing Bird, “will you please cut a piece of canvas eight
inches long and four and one-half inches wide, and make a sampler of
all the stitches you know. Will you write down the directions?”

“Yes,” said Mary Frances, getting pencil and paper.

Then Sewing Bird began:


14.―CANVAS SAMPLER

[Illustration: “Yes” said Mary Frances]

  1. Begin six rows down, and five rows from right hand end with a
  row of Uneven Basting.

  2. A row each of even basting; Running Stitch; Stitching; Catch
  Stitching; Buttonhole Stitching; Hemming,―each two rows apart.

  3. A row of Overhanding―five rows below that.

  4. Blanket Stitch the upper edge.

  5. Overcast the two ends.

  6. Fold canvas back on row of overhanding at bottom of samples.

“Will you bring the pretty sampler, finished, for the next lesson?”
asked Sewing Bird.

“I will―so gladly!” said Mary Frances.

   “But there’s one stitch more,
      There’s one stitch more!
    If it hadn’t been so cross,
      I’d have shown it before,”

added Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: Cross Stitching]


15.―CROSS STITCHING

[Illustration]

  1. Cut a canvas piece, five inches long and three inches wide.

  2. At the right hand end from under side, two holes from the
  edge, and eight holes down, point needle upward. Pull through.

  3. Point needle downward into hole above the hole to the left of
  where thread hangs out, and bring it up through the hole directly
  beneath.

  4. Continue across the canvas.

  5. Return on same row of stitches in same way, but work from left
  to right, taking stitches in exactly the same holes as at first.
  This will form a cross. The stitches must all be taken in the
  same direction.

[Illustration: “Why, so I do!” exclaimed Mary Frances]




[Illustration: CHAPTER VIII]

CHAPTER VIII

SEWING BIRD FAIRY LADY


MARY FRANCES worked very hard whenever she could find a minute; and
the next lesson day she proudly showed Sewing Bird a sampler like
this picture:

[Illustration: “Oh, de-de-dum-dee! de-de-dee!”]

   “Oh, de-de-dum-dee! de-de-dee!
    That sampler certainly pleases me.
    You did it alone? Well, I declare!
    What perfect stitches you have there!”

sang the little bird, hopping, fluttering, gurgling, and spreading
her wings joyously over Mary Frances’ work, very much the way a
spring robin careens over an early worm.

Mary Frances was very happy.

“Now, Sewing Bird, my dear teacher, please tell me what I am to learn
next?” asked Mary Frances, finishing the row of cross stitching.

[Illustration: A sampler like this picture]

   “Indeed I will! Indeed I will!
    Just watch a while my little bill;
    And I to you will quickly tell,
    And you will quickly do, and well,
    This lesson coming next.”

[Illustration: “Won’t it be beautiful!”]

With these words, the little bird leaned over the edge of the table
and stuck her bill into the drawer beneath. Then she pulled out a
long sheet of paper.

“Oh,” gasped Mary Frances, “what is that, dear teacher?”

“That,” said Sewing Bird, shaking her wings, “is a model for you to
follow in making,


16.―GRAND SAMPLER ON CANVAS

  Cut a piece of canvas twelve inches by nine inches, and follow as
  exactly as you can the picture on the next page.

“Won’t it be beautiful!” exclaimed Mary Frances, “I’ll do it in
all the pretty colors―I have almost every shade of mercerized
working-cotton here.”

“Yes,” said Sewing Bird,

[Illustration: She pulled out a long sheet of paper]

[Illustration: Illustration of Sampler]

   “Your Grandma took a prize
      At Persimmon County Fair,
    With a pretty sampler
      Like the picture lying there;
    If you work yours aright,
      ’Twill be a prettier thing,
    That well may win a prize,
      From our merry Thimble King.”

[Illustration: When Mary Frances opened her eyes]

“All right!” laughed Mary Frances. “I’ll work from time to time on
the Grand Sampler. But, Sewing Bird, will you tell me, please―are
you―aren’t you, a real fairy? You seem so like a fairy ‘come true!’”

   “Dear little Miss, I’ll give you
      A secret to keep.
    Put your hand over your eyes,
      And don’t dare to peep!
    Now, you may take away your hand―
   Behold, a Lady from Thimble Land!”

[Illustration: The loveliest, sweetest fairy lady]

[Illustration: “Now, dear, ready for the lesson”]

When Mary Frances opened her eyes, there sat the loveliest, sweetest
little fairy lady on the edge of the table in place of Sewing
Bird;―only Mary Frances noticed her lips looked very much like the
bill of a bird.

“Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh!” gasped Mary Frances in surprise. “Oh, really,
truly, oh, me! Oh, dear! How perfectly lovely! You lovely―”

“Now, Mary Frances, dear, ready for the lesson,” smiled the little
lady, in the same flute-like voice as Sewing Bird’s.

“Miss Fairy,” said Mary Frances, trembling with joy, “I will do my
very best,―but, please, what may I call you?”

   “Just shut your eyes,
      And not a word;
    My name you have
      So often heard;
    It’s known to
      But a very few,
   But I will show
      My name to you―”

When Mary Frances opened her eyes, there sat her grandmother’s sewing
bird.

[Illustration: There sat her Grandmother’s sewing bird]

[Illustration: “Pen Cil,” the fairy called]

“You dear little bird,” she exclaimed. “I know now! You are the
Fairy!―and I know!―the Fairy’s name is Sewing Bird!”

“Just so! Just so! Just so! Just so!” sang Sewing Bird,―

   “Now quickly shut your eyes―and then
    The Fairy Lady will come again!”

And again came Fairy Lady.

“Oh,” laughed Mary Frances, “dear Sewing Bird Fairy Lady, please wait
a minute,” and running out of the room, she brought back her doll’s
rocking chair and put it on the table.

“Please be more comfortable!” she said.

“Thank you very much, dear child!” said Fairy Lady.

“Now, for work! Cut a piece of unbleached muslin, nine inches long
and five and one-half inches wide.”

“Good!” she exclaimed, as Mary Frances held up the muslin properly
cut.

“Pen Cil,” the fairy called.

[Illustration: “Thank you very much, dear child”]

[Illustration: Marked off the muslin like this]

With a bound, a yellow lead pencil which lay on the machine, sprang
over to the table and made a funny little stiff bow to Sewing Bird
Fairy Lady, who picked up a big bodkin and, using it as a sceptre,
touched him, saying―

“Mark off the muslin as I told you.”

To Mary Frances’ amazement, Pen Cil marked off the muslin like this:

“You may retire,” said Fairy Lady, “Thank you,―and Mary Frances,
child, you may sew the muslin very much as you did the Canvas
Sampler, with that finer red D. M. C. cotton, No. 12.”

“Am I to be forgotten?” came a tinkling sound from Mary Frances’
basket, as she started to sew.

“Who is that?” asked Mary Frances peeping over the edge.

“I’m Thimble!” exclaimed a wee little voice, “and the reason I always
wear my helmet, is that I want to wield my sword,” as Mary Frances
lifted him out.

“I beg your Majesty’s pardon,” said the little fellow turning to
Sewing Bird Fairy Lady―“but perhaps Miss Mary Frances doesn’t
understand that all needles are my swords!”

[Illustration: “Am I to be forgotten?”]

“He thinks himself so brave a soldier,” laughed Sewing Bird Fairy
Lady―“when all the time he is perfectly useless by himself.”

“But he is a great help,” said Mary Frances. “I don’t see how I could
sew without him.”

“Good!” said Fairy Lady. “But he’ll be prouder than ever! That’s all
for to-day―next lesson we will make something for your dolly to use.”

“Oh, how lovely!” exclaimed Mary Frances, finishing her last
stitches. “What is it?”

   “Oh, well! oh, well, O!
    I best not tell, O!
    But something she can use real well, O!
    Now for to-day, farewell,
        Farewell, O!”

And as Mary Frances looked up from her work, there was the empty
rocking chair and her grandmothers’ sewing bird was sitting on its
perch on the table.

[Illustration: As Mary Frances looked up from her work, there was the
empty chair]




[Illustration: CHAPTER IX]

CHAPTER IX

MAGIC AND MYSTERY


[Illustration: “Can I talk?”]

   “I’M Cross Patch, Cross Patch!
    Nobody dares to lift the latch!
    I’m Cross Patch, Cross Patch!
    Click―ety―clatch!
        Cross Patch!”

Mary Frances heard this outside the sewing room door.

“My,” she thought, “that sounds like the scissors―I really believe
it is!” She peeped in, and this is what she saw:

Scissors Shears was strutting on tip-toe up and down the sewing
table, closing up each time to take a step.

“Why,” said Mary Frances, slipping in, “can you talk, too?”

[Illustration: “Can you talk?”]

[Illustration: “I can even cut myself!”]

“Can I talk?” exclaimed Scissors Shears in a growling voice. “Can
I talk? Yes, and walk, too! As if I weren’t years older than that
Sewing Bird― Rip ’er up the back! Rip ’er up the back! That
conceited thing thinks she knows everything,―why I could tell you
all about how to cut out anything. Why, I know all about cutting
things out! I can even cut myself!”

Click―click, came his legs together.

“Well, well,” laughed Mary Frances. “If that is so, perhaps Sewing
Bird will let you explain some things to me.”

“It cuts me to the quick to be cut like this,” he started
again,―then Sewing Bird began to sing,

   “If anything you’d like to do,
    To prove yourself so very true―
    Immediately to work―don’t brag!
    Cut out


PATTERN 1.―DOLL’S LAUNDRY BAG

  Cut bag twelve inches long, and five inches wide.

“What goods, what goods?” asked Scissors Shears, excitedly.

“Cut it out of that pretty calico on the table,” said Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: That pretty calico on the table]

“Hurrah!” shouted Scissors Shears, and dived into the calico.

[Illustration: “When you want me otherwise”]

“There!” he exclaimed proudly. “Isn’t that perfect?”

“That’s very even,” said Mary Frances gravely, trying to act as
though she were an excellent judge.

“What next?” she asked Sewing Bird.

   “When you want me otherwise
      Than as a little bird,
    Put your hand over your eyes,
      And say this secret word:

        Magic and Mystery,
        Give my wish to me.”

Mary Frances did so; and there was Fairy Lady once again in the
doll’s rocking chair, who smiled and said,

[Illustration: Dived into the calico]

“Whenever you particularly want ‛this me’ to come, all you have to do
is to put your hands over your eyes, and say to yourself quickly,

   Magic and Mystery,
   Give my wish to me,

and I’ll come at once.”

[Illustration: Magic and Mystery!” exclaimed Mary Frances]

[Illustration: “I’ll come at once”]

“Oh, how lovely!” said Mary Frances.

“And if you want _me_ to turn into anything, you say as fast as you
can,

   Nimble, nimble,
   Turn my thimble,”

said Thimble, looking up at Mary Frances with a comical smile.

“And if you want _me_ to turn into some one else, snap your fingers
three times and say, faster yet,

   Scissors-and-Shears,
   Scissors-and-Shears,
   Now change your ears,
   Now change your ears.”

“I’ll do it now,” laughed Mary Frances, and when she said,

[Illustration:

   “Nimble, nimble,
    Turn my thimble”]

   “Nimble, nimble,
    Turn my thimble,”

there sprang up the cutest little soldier, with needles in his hands
for swords.

[Illustration: “At your service!”]

“Salute!” he shouted in a very thin silvery voice, making a military
bow to Fairy Lady.

“At your service!” he said, turning to Mary Frances, who was looking
on with amazement.

“Are you really my own thimble?” she asked, looking at the second
finger of her right hand.

“It’s me―I, I mean―I’m he―it, I mean―well, anyhow, I’m Thimble,
your Seamstress-ship,” he answered, making another bow.

“Well, well,” said Mary Frances delightedly, “if you are, you can
obey my orders.

“Stand there!” pointing to the left side of Fairy Lady. Then,

  “Scissors-and-Shears,
   Now change your ears,”

she repeated.

[Illustration:

   “Scissors and Shears,
    Now change your ears”]

[Illustration: There were two long ears]

Click! came the feet of the shears, and before Mary Frances saw
how it happened, there were two long ears on the handles, looking
comically like a rabbit’s.

“What long ears you have!” laughed the little girl.

“The better to hear your directions, your Seamstress-ship,” replied
Scissors in a rather sharp voice, clicking his way to the other side
of the rocking chair.

Then Fairy Lady said:

“Dear little Lady Seamstress, we are all from Thimble Land―we are
the Thimble People; there are many more of us, oh, many more. It is
our joy to be able to help you learn to sew. Thimble and Scissors
Shears and the other Thimble People will come help us when anything
becomes very puzzling or difficult; but all through these lessons you
may call upon _me_ at any time; and I shall do my best to give you
happy sewing lessons.”

“Oh, thank you, dear Fairy Lady,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I am
living in Fairyland, and it is real!”

[Illustration: “The way to find Fairyland real.”]

“The way to find Fairyland real,” smiled Fairy Lady, “is to do your
very best from day to day, and to do it happily. The fairies always
help the people who try to do this.”

[Illustration: “What twoddle-doddle!”]

“Oh, pshaw!” exclaimed Scissors Shears in a cutting tone, “what
twoddle-doddle! Even if I don’t make fine speeches, I know all about
cutting.”

“Cut it out!” exclaimed Thimble, raising his sword-needle.

“Slang,” began Scissors Shears, crossly flapping his ears back; but
Fairy Lady leaned forward in her chair, and, reaching out with her
bodkin wand, touched him on the ear, and down he fell flat at her
feet.

Pushing him aside, she said, “I can control him when I have my wand.
If he’s ever rude, and you want me, say the magic verse I taught you.”

“Oh, thank you,” said Mary Frances, smiling to herself.

“I guess if I pulled his ears real hard, he’d be good anyhow,”
she thought, “but I’ll not let Sewing Bird know. All rabbits are
controlled by their ears, and I’m sure he looks more like a rabbit
than any other animal I can think of.”

“Well,” smiled Fairy Lady, “we have the dolly’s laundry bag all cut
out: now, to learn,

[Illustration: “Cut it out!”]


17.―HEMMING ON MUSLIN

  1. First learn to turn a hem on paper.

  2. Cut the paper seven inches long and three and one-half inches
  wide.

  3. Draw a line one-quarter of an inch from lower edge of paper
  and turn up and crease along this line.

  4. One inch above that, draw a line. Turn up and crease along
  that line.

  5. Follow same directions on muslin. Baste and hem.

[Illustration: “I understand now!”]

“Good!” she nodded, as Mary Frances held up the folded paper. “You
remember the hemming stitch on canvas. This is the same kind of
stitch; only, as you have already observed, no doubt, it is a very
zig-zag stitch, and is taken from the single through the folded part
of the goods.

“Wait a minute, I’ll mark it to show you,” and taking the pencil, she
marked the paper as shown on this page.

“Now try it on muslin.”

“Oh,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I understand now!”

[Illustration: First learn to turn a hem on paper]

[Illustration: Now, turn the hem on each end as I have already shown
you.”]

“Only one thing more,” said Fairy Lady, “the way to hide the starting
of the thread. You put the needle in between the fold and the cloth,
and tuck it down. Then put it in, or ‘insert’ it, at 1, and push
it out at 2, and pull it through. Can you do it on the ends of the
laundry bag?”

“Yes, I think I can,” said Mary Frances.

“One minute,” said Fairy Lady, as Mary Frances started.

“First, you must turn in the edges. Here is a piece of paper the size
of the laundry bag.

“On the longer edge, turn up and crease a quarter of an inch fold as
you did in preparing the paper hem. Now, turn the hem on each end as
I have already shown you.

“That’s it!―and that’s all for to-day’s lesson. It was a tech-ni-cal
lesson,” she said.

[Illustration: Now, turn the hem on each end as I have already shown
you.”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER X]

CHAPTER X

A DOLL’S LAUNDRY BAG


“NOW, try it on the laundry bag itself,” smiled Fairy Lady, who was
waiting for Mary Frances next Wednesday.

[Illustration: “Now, try it on the laundry bag”]

“That’s hard to crease!” exclaimed the little girl, laying the calico
down on the table and pressing the fold with her thumb nail.

“Yes,” said Fairy Lady. “It is a good idea to pinch it together
between the thumb and forefinger, to make the crease.”

“Oh, that is much better,” said Mary Frances, and she soon had the
little bag folded ready for sewing.

“What now?” smiled Fairy Lady.

“I begin to hem,” said Mary Frances, flourishing her threaded needle.

“What number cotton are you using?” asked Fairy Lady.

“Number twenty-four,” said Mary Frances.

“Ahem,” Thimble cleared his throat.

[Illustration: Pinch it together between thumb and forefinger]

“A little too coarse,” said Fairy Lady. “I must tell you something
about needles and threads:

“There are several different kinds of


18.―NEEDLES AND THREADS

[Illustration: Needles and]

  Sharps―long needles.

  Betweens―short needles for heavy work.

  Ground-downs―medium long. These do not break or bend easily.

  There are the long-eyed needles―worsted and darning needles.

  Milliner’s very long needles.

  Bodkins―long thick needles, for carrying tapes and cords.

  Open a package of needles No. 5’s to 10’s. In the middle, you
  will find needles

  No. 5―for coarse work or sewing on buttons.

  No. 6―for coarse work.

  No. 7―for hemming towels.

  No. 8―for stitching.

  No. 9―for hemming muslin.

  No. 10―for fine work.

  Use                            Needle      Cotton

  For Tucking, Hemming, Running. No. 9       No. 60, 70 or 80
  For Stitching, Overhanding,
    Overcasting. . . . . . . . . No. 8       No. 50 or 60
  Button-holes . . . . . . . . . No. 7 or 8  No. 36, 40 or 50
  Gathering and Basting. . . . . No. 7 or 8  No. 36 or 40

[Illustration: Threads]

“Oh,” murmured Mary Frances, “I didn’t know.”

“Of course you didn’t, dear little Seamstress,” smiled Fairy Lady.
“That’s why I’m here!”

“Thank you, Fairy Lady,” said Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “Thank you, Fairy Lady”]

“Now, you may begin work on the laundry bag.”

Mary Frances smilingly basted the hems near the edges with even
basting stitches, and then began to do the hemming.

Fairy Lady watched her intently all the while.

“There!” Mary Frances suddenly exclaimed. “I’ve broken my thread. How
do I join it?”

“I will show you this once,” said Fairy Lady. “You do it in very much
the same way as in starting the work,” and she taught Mary Frances
how to tuck both ends of thread under the hem.

“When you finish, just fasten the thread by taking two or three
stitches in the fold. That’s a pretty good looking hem for the first
real hem on muslin,” said Fairy Lady.

“Now, one-quarter of an inch above the hems, put in a row of running
stitches,―with once in a while a back-stitch to strengthen it. This
is called combination stitch.”

[Illustration: This is called combination stitch]

When Mary Frances had done this, she held up the bag, and asked,
“What shall I do next?”

  “I’ll tell you more,
      I’ll tell you more,
    If you can tell
      What that is for!”

[Illustration: “Hush!” said Silver Thimble]

“I know,” guessed Mary Frances. “It’s for a casing to hold the
drawing strings.”

   “Oh, to my heart
      That music rings,
    For you to guess
      It’s ‘drawing strings,’”

sang Fairy Lady.

“How could her heart draw strings,” asked Scissors Shears of Thimble,
in a whisper.

“Hush!” said Silver Thimble, raising his sword-needle.

“Snip!” snapped Scissors Shears. But Fairy Lady, not noticing,
continued the lesson.

[Illustration: “What this is for?”]

[Illustration: “Let me touch the other side”
And behold, the other side was overhanded]

“Do you remember the overhanding stitch on canvas? Yes? Now, those
little ends of the bag above the running stitches, are to be
overhanded together. You put the needle in straighter, and more
toward you―like this,” as she placed the needle in position.

“Now fold the two hemmed ends together, the right sides facing each
other.

“Baste along the longer edges with even basting. Overhand these edges
together.

“You would not always overhand the sides of a bag together,―you
could run it, or back-stitch, or combination stitch it; but we want
this unusually strong because your dolly will have so many clothes to
be stuffed into it. I should say handkerchiefs, because this bag is
really a handkerchief bag, or a _little_ laundry bag.”

“My, how well you have done this side. Let me touch the other
side with my bodkin wand―there!” And behold, the other side was
overhanded.

“That’s lovely, thank you, dear Fairy Lady!” exclaimed Mary Frances,
examining the perfectly beautiful stitches. “How did―?”

   “Oh, that was done
      In Thimble Land―
    Done by the Fairy
      Needle Band.”

laughed the little lady, well pleased at Mary Frances’ delight.

[Illustration: “Thread this tape into a bodkin”]

“Now, thread this narrow tape into a bodkin, and run it into the
casing, all the way round; then tie the ends together. Now, another
piece (they are twelve inches long) in the other end, and tie.”

“Oh, if it isn’t the dearest little bag I ever saw!” exclaimed Mary
Frances, drawing the top together. “Isn’t it lovely! Look, Fairy
Lady!”

But Fairy Lady had gone, and Sewing Bird sat in her usual place on
the table, singing:

   “Oh, little Miss, dear little Miss,
    There never was a joy like this:
    To keep some one from being sad,
    To make some dear one very glad.
    Oh, little lady―”

Crash!

[Illustration: The Laundry Bag]

Sewing Bird sat up stiff and hard and metallic.

“Good joke!” giggled Scissors Shears, who had jumped on the floor to
scare her.

Mary Frances glanced at Sewing Bird, but the door knob was turning,
and she hastily threw her sewing into her basket.

“Bring a piece of white lawn for the next lesson,” whispered Sewing
Bird, throwing Mary Frances a kiss with the tip of her wing.

[Illustration: The door knob was turning―she threw her sewing into
her basket.]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XI]

CHAPTER XI

MR SILVER THIMBLE AND MR EMERY BAG


“GRANDMA,” asked Mary Frances, the next afternoon, “may I have this
little piece of white lawn?”

[Illustration: “May I have this little piece of lawn?”]

“Why, certainly, dear,” said Grandma. “You are such a good child. I
am sure I never saw a little girl who was so able to amuse herself.”

“My, I wish I could explain about my little friends,” thought Mary
Frances, but she answered, “I don’t get very lonely when you are
away, Nanny dear, because I keep busy; and when you are here, we have
such fun together!”

“Heigho!” exclaimed Grandma, “I feel really young again!”

[Illustration: “Why, certainly, dear.”]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: “I wonder if I could give her lessons”]

   “Go to sleep! go to sleep!
      Baby dear, baby dear, mine.
    To and fro, I rock thee deep,
    My arms a cradle for thy sleep;
    Close your eyes, and don’t you peep,
      Baby dear, baby dear, mine.

   “I rock thee deep, but hold thee near,
      Baby dear, Baby dear, mine.
    Nothing can harm thee, never fear!
    Mother-love is so very queer,
    Nothing can make thee but my dear
      Baby―baby mine,”

sang Mary Frances, rocking Angie in her arms.

“My, I’m glad I got that child to sleep before my sewing lesson,” she
said.

“I hope she’ll be quiet all through the afternoon. Every once in a
while I’ve had to take her over to Lottie’s to stay. I’ve put myself
under ob-li-ga-tion to Lottie, and I’ll have to make something for
one of her children―oh, I wonder if I could give her some sewing
lessons, the way I did Eleanor cooking lessons.

“How I wish Eleanor were here! I do miss her so!

[Illustration: “Baby―baby, mine”]

“I’ll tip-toe in to my lesson with this child in my arms, and put
her carefully in the big rocking chair, so as to have her near
if she cries. Of course, I’m only pretending she’s a tiny young
thing―because I didn’t bring my baby infant doll with me, and
this is only Angie. She’s really almost three years old; but my,
she certainly does love to be ‛babied’―and I’d certainly get very
lonesome if I didn’t do it―with Mother and Father so far away―and
Billy in camp!”

[Illustration: The big tears rolled down]

The big tears rolled down her cheeks.

“Come, Mary Frances,” she said. “I feel like shaking you. When you
promised Father so faithfully to be a woman, and your Grandma is such
a darling!―Suppose you read Mother’s last letter over:

_Dear Little Big Mary Frances_:

_Only twenty times has Mother read over your sweet letter. It was
so dear, and brave. I am much better than I was―thanks to such a
loving family―and the lovely “aps-mos-spere” here, as you used
to say when you were little._

_What a beautiful country this is―your “Fatherland” and mine. I
want you to see some day the lovely view I am now looking upon:
mountains rising high and peeping over this lovely stretch of
country to look into the Pacific Ocean, which sparkles like that
ir-i-des-cent feather in your dear Grandma’s bonnet._

[Illustration: Read Mother’s last letter]

_Father is calling me to come for a ride, and I must drop a line to
my Billy Boy―who is a good Scout, too._

_Can you feel this kiss and this hug? I know you can―for what are
miles to us whose love for each other flies through space?_

_Your loving Mother._

_P.S.―Thank you so much for the picture of Jubey._

[Illustration: With Angie asleep in her arms]

“My, I feel better,” said Mary Frances, drying her tears. “But if it
weren’t for my sewing lessons, even with Grandma’s help, I’d not be
a Scout. Billy is a good Scout:―but now,―for the lesson,” and she
went to the sewing-room very softly, with Angie asleep in her arms.

“Hee-ha!” she heard through the door, which was a very tiny way open,
“that’s the time!”

She thought it was the voice of Silver Thimble.

“I don’t care,” answered a new voice. “It’s too much, to have to
clean them all at once.”

“Oh, there are only two more. Come, I’m ready―it is really excellent
practice for a soldier!”

[Illustration: “It is really excellent practice”]

“Take ’em out, take ’em out, I say!”

[Illustration: “No in-sub-or-din-a-tion!”]

Mary Frances feared to make a noise―but she quietly pushed the door
open a little wider and saw Silver Thimble on one side of the table,
and over on the opposite side, the queerest little fellow.

“Looks like the picture of a porcupine,” thought Mary Frances.

“It may be good practice for a soldier,” groaned the queer little
figure, “but pity the target! Besides,―one at a time, please!”

“Emery Bag, what do you think you were made for? I hope you realize
it’s your duty to clean all the rust and roughness off these
needles as I run them through you, so that the little Miss may sew
more easily,” lectured Thimble. “No in-sub-or-din-a-tion! Stop and
think! You know my family’s power,―you know my family’s wealth. You
realize, I hope, you live in a land named for my aris-to-crat-ic
ancestors―Thimble Land!”

“Oh, ancestors go-to-China!” exclaimed Emery Bag. “We live in the
present, and I demand―I demand justice. I leave it to anybody if
it’s fair to have twenty needles stuck into your heart at once!”

[Illustration: “Take ’em out, I say!”]

“The idea of being such a coward!” retorted Thimble. “Where’s your
heart of steel you brag of so often?”

[Illustration: “Fatty!”]

“It’s scarcely fair, you know,” came a new voice. “You see, twenty
needles at once are really more than are needed.”

“Humph, Tommy Pin Cushion,” answered Silver Thimble. “What you
sticking your ’pinion in for? It’s a wonder Sewing Bird hasn’t stuck
her bill in! Tommy Pin Cushion, you might just as well keep out of
this―everybody knows you’re stuck on yourself―Fatty!”

“You conceited old Silver Thimble,” came the voice of Pin Cushion.
“You will please address me by my full name―‘Tomato-Pin-Cushion,
Custodian-of-the-Sword-Needles’;―and what’s more, if you don’t
quickly remove all those needles from poor Emery, you won’t get any
more sword-needles to wield. So there! You know Sewing Bird’s taking
forty winks; that’s why you don’t act in your best military manner.”

Silver Thimble looked toward Sewing Bird, whose eyes began to open,
and quickly went toward Emery Bag. Taking out the needles, one at a
time, he ran to Pin Cushion and quilted each into its place.

[Illustration: “You conceited old Silver Thimble.”]

“There!” he exclaimed at length, “I’m certainly glad I’ve ‘stacked
all my arms’―my, I’m tired!” As he leaned back to yawn, off fell his
helmet and he melted away.

“Serves him right,” murmured Emery Bag; “I hope Fairy Lady won’t
ask him to the sewing party to-day,―she really arranges all these
lessons.”

   “Don’t fear! Don’t fear!
      Mr. Emery Bag;
    You’ve got Silv Thimble’s
      Very last tag,”

sang Sewing Bird.

“Good!” thought Mary Frances. “Now, I’ll go in.”

[Illustration: “My, I’m glad I got that child to sleep”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XII]

CHAPTER XII

MARY FRANCES’ TREASURE BOX


“GOOD-AFTERNOON, dear Thimble People,” said the little girl, putting
Angie on a rocking chair.

[Illustration: “An apron and a pinafore”]

“Good-afternoon,” came many little voices, and Sewing Bird began to
sing:―

   “Oh, do you know,
      Oh, do you know
    What we have planned
      For us to sew?”

“I don’t,” laughed Mary Frances. “Please tell me?”

   “For your dear dolly we will make,
    And every pains will try to take,
    An apron, and a pinafore;
    And later, other things galore;
   Her wardrobe we so full will fill,
   No one would care to pay her bill.”

[Illustration: “What we have planned For us to sew?”]

“Magic and Mystery!” exclaimed Mary Frances, putting her hands over
her eyes; and Fairy Lady sat in the doll’s rocking chair.

[Illustration: “Thank you dear Fairy Lady”]

“Oh,” said Mary Frances somewhat breathlessly, “excuse me for calling
you so suddenly, but I so wanted to talk with another woman―” and
then she blushed, fearing she had offended the little bird.

“And not a bird,” smiled Fairy Lady. “I understand,” she nodded,
“a bird, be she ever so wise, doesn’t understand the needs of a
doll-child or the heart of her mother.”

“Thank you, dear Fairy Lady,” replied Mary Frances.

“And I know how brave you are while your mother is away, Mary
Frances, child,” continued Fairy Lady, “but I’ve had orders from
our King not to speak of that―so we’ll get the material ready for
dolly’s apron.”

“Here is the lawn,” said Mary Frances. “Grandma gave it to me.”

[Illustration: “Here is the lawn”]

[Illustration: “Yes, some day”]

“By the way,” said Fairy Lady. “Where will you put these things as
you make them? You must keep them a secret, you know, until we finish
the lessons, or we’ll become Never-Nevers.”

“I shall keep them in my treasure box. Mother gave it to me a year
ago. It has a little key and it locks. Mother said all girls love to
have a kind of a secret place to keep treasures in.”

“Have you the box here?” asked Fairy Lady.

“Oh, yes,” smiled Mary Frances. “I keep it in my trunk. It is made of
tin, and very light.”

“Go and get it, please.”

“Good,” laughed the sweet voice of Fairy Lady, as Mary Frances
brought in the treasure box. “Now, everything is prepared.”

“May I tell about the lovely lessons, sometime?” asked Mary Frances.

“Yes,” smiled Fairy Lady. “You may,―some day. We do not want our
help to be given to one little girl only―so when we are all through,
you can form a Sewing Circle to which your girl friends may belong,
and you can teach them all you have learned.”

[Illustration: “In my treasure box”]

“Oh, how perfectly lovely!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “But won’t you
help me any more then,―you, and the dear, dear Thimble People?”

“You’ll have your mother then, you know,” explained Fairy Lady.

“Oh, yes,” said Mary Frances happily. “She had planned to teach me to
sew this very summer―it will be another grand surprise for her if I
know how―when she comes.”

“I wish afternoons were much longer,” smiled Fairy Lady; “but we must
do our lesson. Now, just a word


19.―ABOUT CLOTH, WEAVING, AND SPINNING

  Cotton cloth is made from the cotton plant; wool cloth from
  sheep’s fleece; silk cloth from silk worm’s cocoon; linen cloth
  from the flax plant.

  The soft cotton is the warm coat for the cotton plant seed-baby.
  The fleecy wool is the warm coat of the sheep, or the little
  lambs. The web from the silk worm’s cocoon is the cradle in which
  it sleeps. Linen is made from the stalks of the flax plant.

  When these materials are spun, or twisted, into long threads, we
  have spool cotton and silk, wool yarns, and linen thread, for
  sewing. When the threads are woven or laced together into cloth,
  the stronger threads run the length of the goods―they are the
  warp threads. The weaker, or woof threads, run crosswise of the
  goods.

[Illustration: “Good, now everything is prepared”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XIII]

CHAPTER XIII

MAKING A DOLL’S APRON


“IN cutting any garment, wherever there will be a pull upon the
goods, what threads should bear the strain?”

[Illustration: “The warp threads”]

“The warp threads,” answered Mary Frances, deeply interested.

“Good,” said Sewing Bird Fairy Lady, “the warp threads, or lengthwise
of the goods. Now, we are ready for


PATTERN 2.―DOLL’S APRON

  1. Cut a piece of lawn five inches, lengthwise of the goods; and
  seven inches wide. You can pull out a thread and cut along the
  line it makes, to get a perfectly straight edge.

  2. Cut two strings each six inches long, lengthwise of the goods,
  and one and one-half inches wide.

  3. Cut a band four inches long, and two inches wide.

“How tall is your dolly?” she asked.

[Illustration: “How tall is your dolly?”]

[Illustration: “Sixteen inches tall”]

“I’ll have to measure,” said Mary Frances. “Come,” she said, “Angie,
dear, wake up! Mother wants to see how big her dolly has grown.”

Angie was very good and stood quite still while Mary Frances held her
against the yardstick.

“Sixteen inches tall,” she said; “nearly half a yard.”

“Then the apron will be just right,” smiled Fairy Lady. “Now, I’ll
give you directions.”


MAKING A DOLL’S APRON (PATTERN 2)

  1. Fold the two five-inch sides together, to find center. Clip a
  notch at the top.

  2. Open. Turn an inch hem at the bottom, and baste it in place.
  Hem with No. 9 needle, and No. 60 or 70 white cotton.

  3. Turn a quarter inch hem on the sides. Baste and hem.

“Next you gather the top, and set the gathers into the band; but
first you must learn about


20.―GATHERING

  Gathering is done by the use of the running stitch.

  1. Turn the goods over one-quarter of an inch from edge and pinch
  a crease to mark a line to follow with the gathering stitches.
  Open it up.

[Illustration: “Learn about gathering”]

[Illustration: Fastening thread over and under the pin]

  2. Use a thread a little longer than the space to be gathered,
  which is from the center notch to the side of the apron.

  (Use No. 40 cotton for gathering the apron.)

  3. Make a good-sized knot, put needle in downward on right side
  of goods.

  4. Sew on crease, taking several stitches before pulling needle
  through. Aim to take up on the needle about half as many threads
  of the goods as you skip, but do not trouble to count them.

  5. When finished, make a knot in the end of the thread and let it
  hang.

  6. Put a pin in at the last stitch you took, and draw up the work
  a little, fastening the thread over and under the pin.

  Stroke the gathers.

“Stroking is done to make the gathers set more evenly.”


21.―STROKING OF GATHERS

  1. With right side toward you, begin at left hand edge.

  2. Hold work between the thumb and first finger of left hand.
  Keep thumb below gathering thread.

  3. Put point of a blunt needle or eye of an ordinary needle under
  a little plait of the goods and bring it up under the thumb, draw
  needle down and pinch plait with thumb.

  NOTE.―Stroking is not often done to very thin goods, lest it be
  torn, but many small stitches are placed on the needle at once
  and pinched together before pulling the thread through.

[Illustration: Use No. 40 cotton]

“Now the apron is ready for


22.―SETTING GATHERS IN A BAND

  1. Find the middle of the band and clip a tiny notch in edge of
  each side.

  2. Clip off each corner of band, to avoid thickness of goods.

  3. Pin the right hand end of the gathered piece one-quarter of an
  inch from the right hand end of band.

[Illustration: Pinch together]

  4. Pin the center of the gathered piece to the center of the band.

  5. Pin the left hand end of the gathered piece one-quarter of an
  inch from the left hand end of the band.

  6. Tighten or loosen the gathering thread to the exact length of
  the band and fasten under and over the pin.

  7. With needle point, distribute, or spread, the gathers evenly.

  8. With gathers toward you, baste with small even basting stitch
  just above the gathering thread.

  9. With stitching stitch, sew the gathering to the band, taking
  up one gather at a time. Fasten thread and cut off.

  10. Turn up the band. Fold the opposite side over toward you
  one-quarter of an inch from the edge. Crease. Do the same to the
  ends of band.

  11. Fold this over the gathers, bringing the folded edge just
  over the stitching.

[Illustration: Setting gathers in a band]

  12. Pin the middle of the band to the middle of the stitching,
  and the ends to the ends, exactly even.

  13. Baste, with even basting.

  14. Hem the gathers against the band, taking up one gather at a
  time. Do not let the stitches show on right side.

[Illustration: “Now it is ready for setting gathers in a band”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XIV]

CHAPTER XIV

A LOAN FROM THE THIMBLE KING


“DEAR me,” sighed Mary Frances. “How will I ever get so much done? I
didn’t want to interrupt you, dear Fairy Lady, but I’ve gotten, you
see, no further than basting the hem of dolly’s apron!”

[Illustration: “Dear me.”]

Big tears trembled in the little girl’s eyes.

“Dear child,” smiled Fairy Lady. “We realize how rapidly we’ll have
to work in these lessons in order to get through before your mother
comes, so we are ready to help.”

With this, she rapped three times on the sewing table with her bodkin
wand, whereat a little fellow of queer appearance walked solemnly up
to Mary Frances and made a pompous bow.

[Illustration: “There is but one needle in the world”]

“There is but one needle in the world, your Seamstress-ship,” he
said, “which is called the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try, and the King
of the Thimble People has sent it to you by your humble servant,”
glancing proudly about.

“Why,” said Mary Frances, scarcely daring to breathe. “Why,―you, you
are certainly my own needle book!”

“Needle Book―that’s my name,―and here, dear Mistress, is the
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try.”

[Illustration: The little girl hesitated]

Mary Frances saw a bright shiny light come from between the opening
leaves of Needle Book; then slowly, very slowly, with his tiny little
hand, he pulled out what seemed a needle of fire, and dropping on his
knees, held it out on both arms toward Mary Frances.

The little girl hesitated. Would it burn her?

“Do not fear,” smiled Fairy Lady. “It will not harm you. The
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try is loaned to you on only one condition:
which is, that you will promise to sew some time every day between
lesson days.”

“Oh, I promise,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I do not, dear Sewing Bird
Lady, I do not deserve such beautiful kindness!”

She took the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try from Needle Book.

[Illustration: Held it out towards Mary Frances]

[Illustration: “Poor Pinny”]

“I do thank you―very―gratefully,” she said, not knowing exactly how
to behave toward the ambassador of the Thimble King.

“For shame, Tommy Pin Cushion!” exclaimed Fairy Lady, who overheard
him mimicking Needle Book. “Don’t make fun! Never, never will you be
Bearer of the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try for the King of Thimble
Land.”

“I beg your pudden!” said Tommy Pin Cushion to Needle Book, getting
very red in the face.

“Poor Pinny!” exclaimed Needle Book, looking very disdainfully toward
Tomato Pin Cushion, “always getting ‘squelched!’”

“Come,” said Fairy Lady. “No more of that needle-and-pin talk!” Then
to Mary Frances:

“Now, little lady, you may begin. The next is


TO HEM DOLLY’S APRON STRINGS

  1. Turn a very narrow hem the long way of the strings. Hem with
  fine hemming stitches.

  2. Turn and make a half-inch hem at one end of each string.

“Shall I finish the apron first?” asked Mary Frances. “Shall―shall I
use the new needle?”

[Illustration: “I beg your pudden”]

[Illustration:

  4. Night Gown
  5. Bath-robe
  6. Kimono
  7. Dressing-sack]


[Illustration: INSERT 1

PATTERNS 4·5·6·7·

  4. NIGHT GOWN
  5. BATH ROBE
  6. KIMONO
  7. DRESSING SACK

TO CUT THIS PATTERN, FOLD GOODS TWICE, AS INDICATED BY DOTTED LINES.

PIN PATTERN THUS ON FOLDED GOODS.

ARROW ⬌ MEANS TO PIN THIS EDGE OF PATTERN _LENGTHWISE_ OF
GOODS.

TWO RINGS O O MEAN THAT THESE EDGES MUST BE PLACED ON FOLDED EDGES OF
GOODS.

ALL SEAMS ALLOWED.

ALL PATTERNS FIT 16 IN. DOLL

USE THESE PATTERNS =FIRST=]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.

“Yes,” smiled the delighted Fairy Lady.

[Illustration: Threaded the needle]

Mary Frances found her thimble, and threaded the glowing needle,
although she feared it would scorch the thread,―but it seemed like
any other needle except that she didn’t have to try twice to put in
the thread.

“I wonder how it is different?” she thought as she started to sew.

Then the most wonderful thing happened. She found the needle darting
ahead of her hand, making the stitches just as fast as she could
touch the eye with her silver thimble.

In a minute the apron was hemmed.

In another minute the apron was gathered.

In another minute the strings were hemmed.

Then the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try stopped dead still and wouldn’t
move.

“Oh! ho!” cried Mary Frances. “What have I done? What have I done?”

“Nothing, dear child,” said Fairy Lady. “But the
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try cannot do for you anything you have not
yet learned; so use your own needle and set the gathers of the apron
into the band.”

[Illustration: In a minute the strings were hemmed]

“Thank you very much,” said Mary Frances, finishing the apron band.

“And now,” said Fairy Lady, “as to


PUTTING THE STRINGS INTO THE BAND

  1. Gather, or lay small plaits at the unhemmed end of strings,
  and insert, or push them into the ends of the band.

  2. Hem down.”

“Well done, dear child,” smiled Fairy Lady at length.

Then quicker than Mary Frances could wink, she turned into Sewing
Bird, and began to sing,

   “Oh, my! Oh, my! Oh, my! Oh, my!
    It brings a twinkle to my eye!
    The Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try!
    Dear little miss, good-bye,
          Good-bye.”

[Illustration: “Dear little miss, good bye, Good bye”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XV]

CHAPTER XV

THREE LITTLE KITTENS


   “THREE little kittens sitting in a row,
      All on a dolly’s lap,
            Tit, tat, toe!”

[Illustration: “Three little kittens sitting in a row”]

sang Sewing Bird when Mary Frances came for the next lesson.

“Three in a row on a dolly’s lap?” said Mary Frances. “Not my
dolly’s, I guess―she couldn’t hold three.”

Then sang Sewing Bird:

   “Come riddle me this,
      Come riddle me that,―
    Your dolly can hold
      A cat, and a cat, and a cat!”

“Why, how? oh, Magic and Mystery!” cried Mary Frances eagerly.

[Illustration: “Why, how?”]

Then came Fairy Lady.

“This way,” she smiled; “come, Pen Cil,” and with a bound Pen Cil
began to draw on the dolly’s apron the picture of kittens given on
this page.

  (Any little girl can transfer this pattern to her own dolly’s
  apron by using a carbon sheet.)

“Oh, how cute!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Yes, I think my dolly could
hold three of those cats.”

Fairy Lady smilingly continued, “Now, with the red working cotton and
a canvas piece you may learn


23.―KENSINGTON OUTLINE STITCH

(Canvas 7 in. by 1-1/2 in.)

[Illustration: Outline stitch]

  1. Begin at the left hand end of a piece of canvas. Put needle in
  from under side. Pull thread through.

  2. Two threads over, put needle in downward and up through the
  hole next to the left, holding work over forefinger of left hand.
  Pull through.

  3. Work from you, and always drop the thread on the same side of
  the needle.

“Now, try it on muslin. You’ll need an embroidery needle, because the
large eye makes way for the heavy cotton.”

[Illustration: Three Little Kittens]

“Oh, I have one here in my basket, and some quite-a-bit finer working
cotton, in pink,―isn’t it pretty?”

“I―I―put it there,” began Needle Book.

“Hush!” said Fairy Lady, holding up a finger. “Now, little Miss, see
if you can make that stitch on muslin.”

[Illustration: Tumbled into the basket]

“Very good, indeed.”

“Mary Frances! Mary Frances! Mary Frances!” came Grandma’s voice from
the hall.

With one leap, Fairy Lady changed to Sewing Bird, and all the other
Thimble People, who had been standing on the sewing table, tumbled
head-over-tin-cups into the sewing basket.

“Yes, Grandma,” called Mary Frances, running out.

“Why, my dear,” puffed the old lady, climbing the last of the stairs,
“I am home very early, you see. There was no regular meeting to-day
because almost all the members of the Ladies’ Guild went to Daisy’s
wedding. I’m home for some games with my little girl.”

“Oh, Nanny-dear, will you play ‛Piddy-Pinny-Plump?’” asked Mary
Frances.

[Illustration: “Mary Frances!”]

“Yes, indeed, girlie,” laughed Grandma.

“Goody!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I’ll be ready soon as ever I tidy
up the sewing room.”

“I’m sorry, dear Thimble People,” she began. Then she heard the sweet
bird voice of Sewing Bird, singing very softly,

   “With outline stitch,
      So pretty and neat,
    Outline the kitties,
      From head to feet;

    And have them done
      When next we meet,
    And they will look,
      Sweet, sweet! Sweet, sweet!”

[Illustration: “This way,” she smiled, “come Pen Cil.”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XVI]

CHAPTER XVI

A SURPRISE FROM MOTHER


A SHARP ring at the door bell.

[Illustration: “A telegram for Miss Mary Frances”]

“A telegram for Miss Mary Frances,” said Katie coming into the
dining-room.

“A telegram! And for you, Mary Frances. What can it be!” exclaimed
Grandma.

“Shall I sign for it, ma’am?” asked Katie.

“No,” said Grandma. “Mary Frances better learn to sign for herself.”

There was a little look of excitement in Grandma’s face, and a little
pink spot in each cheek.

Trembling with wonder, Mary Frances gravely wrote her name in the
book. She opened the queer looking envelope, with printing almost all
over its face, and read:

  Telegram

  _Miss Mary Frances_:

  _Expect_ |   _by_   | _Express_ |   _Mary_   | _Marie_ |
    _and_  | _trunk_. | _Letter_  | _follows_. |         |
                                                           _Mother._

[Illustration: Wrote her name in the book]

“Oh! Oh! Oh!” she cried. “I know, Nanny dear, I know! Mary Marie is
my dear new dolly. I do wonder what she will be like! Isn’t Mother
too sweet and kind!”

“There’s the postman,” said Grandma, all laughter and smiles. “I
wonder if he―” but Mary Frances was already at the door.

[Illustration: “A letter from Father!”]

“Surely enough,” she cried. “A letter from Father. I’ll read it to
you, Grandma―” tearing open the envelope:

  _Dear Mary Frances_:―

  _Mother bought for you to-day the prettiest doll in San
  Francisco, and she is going to send it by express, as soon as
  she gets some shopping done for the young lady. She will send
  a telegram when she starts Mary Marie on her journey, and will
  write a letter of instruction as to her health, wealth, and
  happiness._

  _Give our love to dear Grandma._

  _It is a delight to send the prettiest doll in San Francisco, to
  the darlingest little girl in the whole wide world―at least she
  is to her_

  _Loving Father._

[Illustration: “There’s the postman.”]

“Your Father meant that to reach here before the telegram,” said
Grandma.

“San Francisco is so far off,” said Mary Frances; “but, oh, Grandma,
isn’t it too lovely! Will Mary Marie have light hair and blue eyes,
or dark hair and brown eyes, I wonder?”

[Illustration: “San Francisco is so far off”]

“I wonder, too,” smiled Grandma.

“I know she’ll be pretty, for Mother has such superb taste, as Father
says.”

“Yes, dear,” smiled Grandma.

“Oh, I can hardly wait,” said the little girl, looking out of the
window.

“Come, dear, finish your breakfast.”

“May I tell Katie?”

“Yes,” nodded Grandma.

Katie was as delighted as Mary Frances.

“Katie is a wonder, Nanny,” said Mary Frances. “She was telling me
yesterday about all she could do when she was little. When she was a
mere child she could cook a pair of pork chops beautifully, she told
me.”

“But Katie is only eighteen, now,” laughed, Grandma.

[Illustration: Katie was delighted]

“That seems awfully old to me,” said Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “You have a dear, sweet, heart”]

“Katie loves animals, too, Grandma,” she went on, “and so do I! Last
summer, Nanny, when Father had Josie Worrell and his horse plow our
garden, I went out and patted the horse’s nose. He was so pleased,
you should have seen him wag his tail.”

Grandma laughed again. “You have a dear, sweet heart, little girlie,”
she said; and taking Mary Frances by the hand, went out on the
veranda.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Oh, Miss Mary Frances, here comes the expressman carrying a box!”
exclaimed Katie a few mornings later.

“Katie, Katie, I’ll go to the door,” cried Mary Frances running down
stairs.

“The dear, blessed dolly!” she exclaimed, taking the big package from
the expressman. “Nanny, I can hear her calling, almost.”

“We’ll have you out of the dark box soon, Mary Marie, dear,” she
whispered through an opening in the wrapping paper.

[Illustration: “Here comes the expressman!”]

“Come, Katie, you help; we’ll carry it where the wrapping will make
no trouble, out in the kitchen―and I’ll bring the dolly for you to
see, Nanny, dear, soon as she’s unpacked.”

“You cut the string, Miss,” said Katie, “and I’ll pry off the cover.”

[Illustration: Surely Mary Marie was a lovely doll]

“Oh,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I never, never saw so much tissue
paper―thirty, thirty-one, thirty-two, thirty-three, thirty-four
sheets―when will I get to her! Oh, there she is! Isn’t she a
darling, Katie! And look, here’s her trunk!”

Surely Mary Marie was a lovely doll. She had beautiful long curls
tied with pink ribbon; and on her feet were short stockings and
slippers,―but her dress was a very plain, simple, “slip” of lawn.

There was a note pinned on Mary Marie’s dress, and a little key. The
note read:

  _Dear Scout_:

  _Please read my letter in the tray of Mary Marie’s trunk before
  unpacking. Here is the key._

  _Mother._

“Oh, bring the trunk, please, Katie,” said Mary Frances, “and I’ll
carry Mary Marie.”

[Illustration: “I’ll pry off the cover”]

[Illustration: Closed her eyes contentedly]

“Come, dear,” she said. “Mother wants to take you up to see Grandma
and Angie, your sister.”

Mary Marie nestled back in Mary Frances’ arms, and closed her eyes
quite contentedly.

“What lovely long eye-lashes,” whispered Mary Frances.

After showing the dolly to Grandma, she unlocked the trunk and took
out her mother’s letter.

“Oh, listen! Grandma, listen!” she burst out. “I’ll read it to you!”

  _Dear Mary Frances:_

  _This is Mary Marie. Isn’t she lovely? She is the very doll
  I’ve been looking for, for my own dear daughter. Father has
  told you something about Mary Marie, but I want to add some
  particulars._

    _I have nothing to say about the care of her,―for I know
  my little girl’s careful, neat ways so well. You may be
  surprised when you unpack her trunk, to find no dresses.
  Mother is sending you, instead, all kinds of pretty goods
  which you may make up into dresses and clothes for your new
  little daughter; and you will find all kinds of laces and
  ribbons, and buttons, and hooks and eyes―everything Mother
  could think Mary Frances or Mary Marie could possibly want._

[Illustration: Unlocked the trunk]

  _There is a set of toilet articles,―but I’ll not tell you about the
  other things, for I know you are anxious to find out for yourself._

[Illustration: A set of toilet articles]

   _I wish I could be with you, dear, to teach you how to make
  the pretty things; but I will, I hope, be able to do that
  before so very long. Meantime, I want you to use everything
  just as you wish. I’ve asked Grandma to let you do exactly
  as you want to with these things, and I ask you not to go
  to her with your sewing problems: for the doctor said that
  Grandma must not strain her eyes with any such work. I know
  you understand._

  _I hope, dear, Mary Marie will bring a little bit of such
  pleasure to her Mother as her Mother has brought to me._

    _With love, and a bear hug_,
    _Mother._

  _P. S.―Expect to be home before long._

“Oh, isn’t it grand! Come on, Nanny, we’ll unpack the trunk now!”

Soon the tray was out, and all the delightful contents were spread in
view.

[Illustration: Soon the tray was out]

“Isn’t it wonderful!” said Grandma, almost as much pleased and
excited as the little girl herself.

These are some of the things they found in Mary Marie’s trunk:

[Illustration: “We’ll unpack the trunk now.”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XVII]

CHAPTER XVII

MARY MARIE’S HANDKERCHIEF


MARY FRANCES watched for the first chance to show the Thimble People
her mother’s presents.

[Illustration: “It’s a plow!”]

When she knew her grandma was napping, she ran breathlessly up to the
sewing room, leaving Mary Marie and her trunk outside the door.

“Oh, Thimble People,” she said, “listen! I can scarcely wait to tell
you about the delightful surprise Mother has sent me. It is too
beautiful―and you can all share it with me! Guess what it is! Guess!”

“That’s easy!” said Scissors Shears excitedly, “it’s a plow!”

“A plow!” exclaimed Emery Bag. “What a silly thing! What put that in
your head?”

“What else has a share, I’d like to know? Little Miss said she’d
‘share it’―and I’ve heard of a plow-share―and so there! Rip-him-up!
I say, Rip-him-up-the-back!”

[Illustration: “Oh, Thimble People!”]

Scissors Shears gave a kick toward Emery Bag.

“For shame!” said Mary Frances. “Now be good, Scissors Shears; and
all guess again.”

[Illustration: “Oh lovely beauty!”]

“I give it up!” sighed Scissors Shears.

“I’ll tell you!” said Mary Frances. “No, I guess I’ll show you! Now,
Thimble People, look! look!” she exclaimed, bringing in Mary Marie
and holding her up before Sewing Bird.

   “Oh, lovely beauty!
    Lovely thing!
    And can it sing,
    Oh, can it sing?”

“No,” laughed Mary Frances, “I don’t believe she can!”

   “Oh, what’s her name?
      Oh, what’s her name?
    Oh, will she run
      Or is she tame?”

asked Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: Holding her up before Sewing Bird]

“Very impolite,” whispered Scissors Shears to

[Illustration:

  8. Pinafore
  9. Morning Dress]


[Illustration: INSERT 2

PATTERNS 8·9·

  8. PINAFORE
  9. MORNING DRESS

  PINAFORE POCKET No 8
  PINAFORE No 8 STRAP
  MORNING DRESS SLEEVE BAND No 8
  M. DRESS NECK BAND No 9
  MORNING DRESS
  PINAFORE
  POCKET
  ☛ READ DIRECTIONS BEFORE CUTTING]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.

[Illustration: “Very impolite,” whispered Scissors Shears]

Tommy Pin Cushion, “to call anybody, ‛What’s-her-name.’”

“This,” said Mary Frances, pretending she did not hear, “this,
Thimble People, is Mary Marie.”

   “A sweet little dolly
      Is Mary Marie!
    As pretty a dolly
      As ever could be.

   “She’s not only sweet,
      But tidy and neat
   From the top of her head
      To the soles of her feet;

  “But she’s full of real woes―
     From her head to her toes
   She sadly needs stitching
     And making of clothes,”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “She’s not only sweet, But timely and neat”]

“She certainly does, dear Magic and Mystery,” laughed Mary Frances.
Then to Fairy Lady,―“and I shall need your help so much! I’m simply
too excited to tell you rightly about all the rest of my perfectly
beautiful surprise―but I will try.”

Then she told of Mary Marie and her trunk.

“Bring in the trunk,―will you, please?” asked Fairy Lady, who had
come at once, in answer to the magic word.

[Illustration: “I’m the richest Mother in the world”]

“Yes, indeed!” said Mary Frances; “I’m the richest mother, I guess,
in the world, with such beautiful goods, dear Thimble People―oh,
such a wonderful lot!”

Then she brought in the trunk and spread out all its pretty contents
before the admiring eyes of the Thimble People.

   “It makes me sing
    As on the wing,
      Though now I’m not a birdie;
    I’ll break in song
    And sing so long
      No one can say a wordie―

if I don’t look out,” sang Fairy Lady, “with such lovely goods to
use for our lesson! But to-day’s lesson, little Miss, is to make a
dolly’s handkerchief. You must first learn

[Illustration: “It makes me sing”]

24.―HEM-STITCHING ON CANVAS

(Size: seven and one-half inches by two and one-half inches)

  1. Draw out one group of threads one inch from edge of canvas.

  2. Turn a hem to meet open space and baste with white cotton.

  3. Thread needle with red cotton and begin at right hand side as
  for hemming, keeping the hem at the top.

  4. Point needle toward you; put needle under one group of cross
  threads and pull through.

  5. Put needle back and under same group of threads, and point it
  through the fold of the hem. Pull through.

To make


PATTERN 3.―DOLL’S HANDKERCHIEF

[Illustration: Cut square of linen]

  Cut a five-inch square of linen and prepare to do


HEM-STITCHING ON LINEN

  1. One-half inch from the edge of the cloth, with the point of a
  needle, pick out and draw a coarse thread; then draw several more
  next to it.

  2. Do the same to the other sides.

  3. Now, turn a hem each side to meet the open space, and baste.

  4. Hem-stitch with number sixty cotton.

[Illustration: Hem-stitching]

“If we were not here to help you, dear little Miss, you’d have to
wait until you were much bigger before doing hem-stitching, for it is
quite a strain on the eyes.

“You may do the canvas hem-stitching; then use the
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try for making dolly’s handkerchief.
Otherwise, you could simply hem the edges of the cloth, and learn
about


25.―SEWING ON LACE EDGING

[Illustration: Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try]

  If lace is to be put on quite full, measure the distance on which
  it is to be sewed, and allow one and one-half times that distance
  in lace.

  1. Place the right side of the lace to the right side of the
  cloth. Baste lightly, along one side. Overhand―beginning
  one-half inch from end of lace.

  2. To turn a corner, measure the width of the lace, and allow
  twice the width, and pin a quarter of an inch beyond the corner.
  Overhand around the corner. Finish and allow one-half an inch on
  end of lace beyond sewing. Cut off.

  NOTE.―Valenciennes Lace has a heavy thread woven in the top on
  which the fullness may be drawn. A gathering thread should be run
  in lace without such a thread.

  4. To join the ends of lace you must learn about making a fell.

[Illustration: Sewing on Lace Edging]

“What is a fell?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion.

“A fell’s a fellow,” solemnly declared Scissors Shears.

“For shame!” exclaimed Fairy Lady.

[Illustration: “Silly!”]

“What does ‘fell’ mean?” persisted Tommy Pin Cushion.

“It means he fell down,” said Scissors Shears.

“Silly!” exclaimed Needle Book. “How could anybody ‘fell down?’”

“Down is entirely too soft to fell!” said Tommy Pin Cushion.

“This is all foolish nonsense!” smiled Fairy Lady. “Let’s proceed to
make the felled seam.”

“Excuse me!” exclaimed Scissors Shears, “but how does a fell seem?”

“It seems you seem to seem not to be what you seem to be!” laughed
Tommy Pin Cushion.

“What’s that?” demanded Scissors Shears sharply.

“A―a seemly fellow!” said Tommy Pin Cushion, giggling.

Everybody laughed.

[Illustration: “What is a fell?”]

“You interrupted me,” said Fairy Lady, “in telling about


26.―MAKING A FELL

  Cut two pieces of muslin, five inches long and two inches wide.

  1. Place the two pieces together, one one-eighth of an inch below
  the other. Baste with uneven basting.

  2. Sew together with Combination Stitch. (Two running stitches
  and a back stitch.)

[Illustration: “I did it with my little helmet”]

  3. Take out the basting, and open the pieces of cloth, and lay
  the seam over so that the wider edge will be on the top.

  4. Turn this in over the narrow edge, and hem.

  Lace is joined in the same way.

“Oh, I see, Fairy Lady. That is so that no raw edges will show,”
exclaimed Mary Frances.

“Good!” smiled Fairy Lady. “Now, to hem-stitch the handkerchief.”

“Where did I put that square of lovely linen?” said Mary Frances.
“Oh, I left it in the work basket. Why―why, look, dear Fairy Lady,
look―it is all cut and hem-stitched.”

“How did this happen?” asked Fairy Lady.

“I did it with my little helmet,” answered a little voice.

[Illustration: Making a Fell]

“Thimble!” exclaimed Mary Frances.

“Thimble, what did you answer first for?” cried a sharp voice. “I
started it!”

“Oh, Scissors!” said Mary Frances.

“Oh, for shame,―to quarrel before our little Miss―” began Tommy Pin
Cushion.

“Oh, you turned good, have you, Tommy Pin Cushion!” exclaimed
Scissors Shears.

[Illustration: “We did have to try hard”]

“I had the honor, your Seamstress-ship,” said Tomato Pin Cushion, “to
furnish the ‘Needle-of-Have-to-Try’ for this work.”

“Ha! Ha!” laughed Needle Book. “That’s a joke.”

“We did have to try hard,” said Thimble, “to get it done so soon.”

“I thank you all, dear Thimble People,” said Mary Frances.

“Will you sew on the lace edging and bring it next time?” asked Fairy
Lady.

“I will,―” said Mary Frances, “Oh, I haven’t shown you the outlined
kitties. Aren’t they good?”

“Splendid!” exclaimed Fairy Lady.

[Illustration: “Ha! Ha!”]

   “Those kittens always will be good
    And never bother you for food;
    You’ll never have to lay down laws
    To make them wash their heads and paws;
    Their whiskers, too, will stand out straight
    As when they sit before the grate;
    They won’t annoy you with their noise
    Nor hide away your pretty toys;
    But kittens quite as good as that
    Were never kittens of a cat.”

“Oh, no,” laughed Mary Frances. “Jubey’d never recognize them. She’d
not know they were kittens.”

“Oh, Jubey!” exclaimed Sewing Bird Lady, anxiously. “Would she eat
me?”

“No,” said Mary Frances. “Not Jubey. She never looks at Dick Canary.”

“Oh, I forgot,” said Fairy Lady, “I am a bird without feathers, and
Jubey wouldn’t care for a bird that didn’t tickle her nose.”

[Illustration: A sweet little dolly Is Mary Marie!”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XVIII]

CHAPTER XVIII

A NIGHTIE FOR HER LITTLE NAP


   “A CHARMING thing
      To make Marie,
    Will be a dainty
      White nightie,”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “White nightie”]

“Oh, good!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “That is just what she needs. I
had to loan her Angie’s best one; and Angie’s terribly cross. You
see, I fear she is a little jealous of my new dolly. I’ll not neglect
Angie, but you understand, dear Sewing Bird Lady, that it is my duty
to clothe this child―” anxiously―“Isn’t that perfectly right?”

   “What would she wear? What would she wear
    Without a loving mother’s care?
    She’d freeze with every winter’s breeze,
    She’d die of shame if any tease;―
    For every thinking body knows
    No doll is glad without fine clothes.”

[Illustration: “Angie’s terribly cross”]

“Thank you, Magic and Mystery,” said Mary Frances.

“And,” smiled Fairy Lady, “the Thimble People have been quite busy
since last lesson―see?” She pulled from under the cushion of the
doll’s chair a paper pattern.

“Oh, how lovely!” exclaimed Mary Frances, clapping her hands. “A real
pattern just such as Mother uses when she makes my dresses? What is
this pattern to be used for?”

“For a dolly’s nightgown,” replied Fairy Lady, smiling happily. “Now,
the materials required are:

[Illustration: “Oh, how lovely!”]

  Three-quarters of a yard of lawn, or muslin. Long-cloth is a very
  nice kind of muslin to use.

  Three-quarters of a yard of lace ribbon beading.

  One yard baby ribbon.

“Here they are!” said Mary Frances, hunting among the treasures in
Mary Marie’s trunk.

“They are perfectly all right,” smiled Fairy Lady.

“Even to a fairy?” laughed Mary Frances.

“Even to a fairy,” nodded Fairy Lady.

“Now, see if you can cut out

[Illustration: A paper pattern]


PATTERN 4.―DOLL’S NIGHTGOWN

See Insert I

[Illustration: “If only―” he whispered]

  Follow the directions on the folded sheet.

  To cut out―

  1. Fold the lawn crosswise.

  2. Lay edge of the pattern having the two rings (oo) on the
  folded edge of the lawn.

  3. Cut out, being careful to clip the little V-shaped notches
  before removing the pattern.

  NOTE.―_Always clip a small gash_ in the corner under arm of
  these kimono-style dresses.

It took Mary Frances some time to fold the goods and pin the pattern
on most carefully. So anxious was she to begin cutting out that she
didn’t notice Scissors Shears looking at her most beseechingly.

“If only―” he whispered―“if only―” but Sewing Bird Fairy Lady gave
him an indignant push with her bodkin wand.

“The little lady must learn how,” she said.

“Of course, of course,” said Scissors Shears in a whisper, clicking
off the words sharply, “but I want to help―”

“You’ll help if you lend yourself―”

[Illustration: Lay edge of pattern on folded edge of lawn]

“Lend myself,” said Scissors Shears. “Now I might lend some one else.
I could lend Bod Kin, for instance.”

“Bod Kin!” exclaimed Mary Frances, catching the last words. “Is he a
Thimble person?”

[Illustration: “Is he a Thimble person?”]

“He was!” sighed Scissors Shears, letting several tears fall.

“But,” explained Fairy Lady, “one day he refused to do as the King
commanded, and would not go through the muslin―so the King changed
him into a blunt-nosed needle; and he has been compelled to be good
ever since, even without his own consent.”

“Poor Bod Kin!” said Scissors Shears, turning over so sharply that
everybody jumped,

   “Poor Bod Kin,
      He didn’t win;
        It is a sin,
          Thin as a pin,
            Can’t make a din―
              Poor old Bod Kin!
                If I were he
                  And he were I,
                    He wouldn’t be he
                      And I wouldn’t be I.”

[Illustration: “Poor Bod Kin”]

“Hee-hee,” tinkled the silvery voice of Silver Thimble. “If you get
too bright, you’ll try to cut things out with one leg, Mr. Scissors.”

[Illustration: “Lend yourself!”]

“Come,” said Fairy Lady, “Miss Mary Frances, your Seamstress-ship,
will you please begin to cut the goods?”

“Lend yourself!” whispered Tomato Pin Cushion to Scissors Shears.

“Tommy Pin Cushion, you’re stuck up!” clicked Scissors Shears,
walking across the sewing table.

“I’ll cut by the pattern most carefully, dear Sewing Bird Lady,” said
Mary Frances.

“Come,” taking Scissors Shears up quite carelessly. “Just like a
grown up lady,” she thought as she cut out the little nightgown, and
proudly held it up to the view of the Thimble People.

“Beautiful!” they cried.

“Not so beautiful as it will be,” said Fairy Lady, “when it

   Has lace and ribbon,
   And ribbon and lace,
   Holding the lovely
   Things in place.”

[Illustration: “Beautiful!”]

“Oh,” said Mary Frances. “I can scarcely wait!”

“Well, then,” said Fairy Lady, “let us begin by learning a neat
method of putting two materials together when the edges fray easily.
It is called a


27.―FRENCH SEAM

[Illustration: French Seam]

  1. Put the wrong sides of two pieces of goods against each other.

  2. Baste about one-eighth of an inch from edge.

  3. Sew with running stitch near the basting. Remove basting.

  4. Turn the goods the other side out, and baste so as to enclose
  the seam.

  5. Stitch with half-backstitching.

“Now, let us see what the nightgown looks like?” Mary Frances held it
up.

“Good!” said the Fairy Lady. “Next you’ll learn


TO MAKE DOLL’S NIGHTGOWN.―(PATTERN 4.)

  1. Fold the two long halves together, and pin the notches against
  each other.

  2. Baste carefully along this edge, and try on dolly. Alter, if
  necessary.

  3. With running stitch, sew near the basting.

  4. Turn to other side and baste seam carefully to enclose the
  first seam―a French Seam.

  5. Sew with half-backstitching. Turn to right side.

[Illustration: “Good!” said Fairy Lady]

“Do you recognize the French Seam?”

[Illustration: “I’m the gratefulest child”]

“Indeed I do,” smiled Mary Frances.

“You may use the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try for this lesson,” said
Fairy Lady, “because you’ve already learned these stitches. Doesn’t
it pay to work patiently at first?”

“Oh, I’m the gratefulest child,” said Mary Frances, taking from
Needle Book the shining needle, which seemed almost too precious to
use, and beginning to sew.

In a twinkle the French seams were neatly made.

“Now,” said Fairy Lady, “fold a three-quarter of an inch hem at the
bottom, and baste. Then hem it.”

The hemming the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try quickly did.

“Ready,” continued Fairy Lady, “for


FINISHING THE NECK

  Clip a half dozen little slashes in the edge of the neck, and
  turn back to the right side of the goods one-quarter of an inch.
  Baste.

  Turn back one-quarter of an inch the end of the lace beading for
  ribbon, and baste it over the turned back goods, beginning in the
  center of the back.

[Illustration: To finish neck]

  Cut off the lace beading one-quarter of an inch beyond the place
  it meets the beginning, and finish by turning it in one-quarter
  of an inch. Hem beading down on lower edge.


FINISH THE SLEEVES

  in the same way, but it is not necessary to slash them. Then
  sew by overhanding stitch, some Valenciennes lace in neck and
  sleeves. Join ends of the lace by a fell.

[Illustration: Thread Bod Kin with ribbon]

“Is that right?” asked Mary Frances at length.

“Good,” smiled Fairy Lady. “Now thread Bod Kin with the pretty baby
ribbon, and run it in and out of the lace beading.”

“Not your fairy wand!” exclaimed Mary Frances, hesitating to take
hold of the bodkin wand Fairy Lady was holding out to her.

“For those who try,” smiled Fairy Lady, “no gift of the fairies is
too good. Be sure to commence to run the ribbon in at the center of
the front,” she added, as Mary Frances took up Bod Kin. “And leave
ends long enough to tie pretty big bows.”

“Isn’t it a darling!” exclaimed the little girl, holding up the white
nightgown. “Now to try it on Mary Marie.”

[Illustration: To finish the sleeve]

[Illustration:

  11. Underwaist
  19. Guimpe]


[Illustration: INSERT 3

PATTERNS 11·19

  11. UNDERWAIST
  19. GUIMPE]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.

“Draw the ribbon to fit her neck and arms,” said Sewing Bird Fairy
Lady, “and tie the bows.”

[Illustration: “Oh, dear me!”]

“Sweet Mary Marie!” sighed Mary Frances, looking at the lovely
doll. “You ought to sleep well in such a pretty nightie! Isn’t it
beautiful!”

       *       *       *       *       *

“Oh, dear me!”

Such a sigh!

Mary Frances looked up in surprise. Fairy Lady was gazing at Mary
Marie with a sad, wistful look.

“Why, dear Fairy Lady,” exclaimed Mary Frances, “what’s the matter?”

“Nothing, my dear, so very queer,” said the Fairy Lady smiling; “only
that nightgown is just my size.”

“Oh,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “So it is! You can have it, dear Fairy
Lady. I’ll work and work to make Mary Marie another. Do take it!”

“No, thank you, dear little Miss,” said Sewing Bird Lady,

[Illustration: Sweet Mary Marie]

   “I’ve lovely fairy robes galore,
    A thousand, and perhaps some more,―
   But when I see your loving care,
   I’d be your dolly―I declare
   I really think I would;―but, there!
   I hear your grandma on the stair―
           Peep!”

[Illustration: “You ought to sleep well in such a pretty nightie!”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XIX]

CHAPTER XIX

HER BATH ROBE


[Illustration: Sewing Bird stopped singing]

   “IF only in her nightie clad,
    She took a cold, ’twould be too bad―
    And so the dear child may not freeze,
    And so the dear child may not sneeze,
    A nice warm bath robe next will be
    Our lesson finished―”

Sewing Bird stopped singing.

“Brought to she,” interrupted the tinkling voice of Silver Thimble.

“Silv Thimble!” exclaimed Sewing Bird, “when I need help, I’ll call
upon you―”

“Magic and Mystery!” laughed Mary Frances.

“Oh, dear Fairy Lady,” said she. “Is it true―is it true―a bath robe
for Mary Marie?”

“Yes,” smiled Fairy Lady. “Here is

[Illustration: “Brought to she”]


PATTERN 5.―DOLL’S BATH ROBE

See Insert I

  To cut out―

  1. Cut in the same way as nightgown, using the pattern marked
  BATH ROBE.

  2. Remove pattern from material.

  3. On the pattern, find the pinholes pricked along the neck line.

[Illustration: “What goods shall I use?”]

  Cut down _one_ row of these pinholes.

  Fold the paper back along the other row of pinholes.

  4. Spread open the bath robe.

  Pin pattern in place on _one thickness_ of material.

  Cut along the V-shaped neck line.

  Remove pattern.

  5. Continue to cut the V-shaped neck to the bottom of the robe.

  This makes the front opening.

“Pin it to the goods. Cut it out most carefully.”

“But what goods shall I use, dear teacher?” asked Mary Frances,
searching in Mary Marie’s trunk.

“Oh, look, here is some lovely light blue eider-down flannel.”

“Just the thing!” exclaimed Fairy Lady.

[Illustration: Continue V shaped opening to bottom]

“Is there any ribbon to match?” peering over the table edge to look
into the trunk.

[Illustration: “I can’t bother with you”]

“Too narrow,” as Mary Frances held some up.

“There!” pointing down into the tray of the trunk, “that Dresden
figured, pink and blue, inch wide ribbon is beautiful, and there must
be about a yard and three-quarters of it.”

“Lovely!” exclaimed Mary Frances, putting it with the flannel on the
table. “Now, I’ll cut out the bath robe.”

“Very important! Very important!” whispered Tommy Pin Cushion as
Scissors Shears came dancing, first on one leg and then on the other,
to the edge of the table.

“I can’t bother with you,” whispered Scissors Shears, looking
cross-eyed at Tommy Pin Cushion, “I’ve too much to go through,”
glancing up to see if Mary Frances noticed; but the little girl was
smoothing out and pinning the pattern in place, and did not seem to
hear.

“Oumph!” groaned Scissors Shears, as Mary Frances cut into the thick
fabric.

[Illustration: “Very important!”]

“Bite into it hard, Scissors!” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion, but Fairy
Lady silenced him with a wave of her wand.

“All cut out, and so well!” she said.

Scissors Shears looked pleased, as Mary Frances laid him down on the
table.

Then Fairy Lady told how


TO MAKE DOLL’S BATH ROBE.―(PATTERN 5.)

  1. Pin seams together, being certain to match notches.

[Illustration: Pin seams together]

  2. Baste. Try on doll. Alter, if necessary.

  3. Stitch, or use combination stitch (two running stitches and a
  back-stitch).

  4. Overcast, or blanket-stitch the raw edges of the seams.

  5. Fold inch wide ribbon, and slip it over the raw edges of the
  bath robe―that is, the fronts and neck, and the sleeves.

  6. To fit ribbon around curves, gather it a short distance on the
  fuller edge.

  When ready to cut ribbon, allow one-half inch for folding under
  when finishing.

  Hem ends down carefully.

  7. With sewing silk to match the ribbon, sew it to the robe, with
  small “in and out” stitches, slanting the needle slightly each
  time. Pull needle through to wrong side, then through to right
  side with each stitch―just as you did first stitches in canvas
  work.

  8. Turn bottom of robe up one inch. Baste.

  Catch-stitch with close stitches.

[Illustration: Slip ribbon over raw edges]

Mary Frances worked quietly for some time. “But how will my child
fasten her bath robe?” she asked at length.

“Oh,” said Fairy Lady. “That’s a good question! Now learn,


28.―TO SEW ON HOOKS AND EYES

[Illustration: Hook]

  No. 36 cotton, No. 7 needle. Two pieces muslin three inches by
  three inches. Fold in half. Baste edges.

_The Eye_

  1. Place the eye a little beyond the double edge of the muslin.
  Hold firmly.

  2. Overhand around the circles of the eye, beginning at the
  further side. Try not to let stitches come out on other side of
  the cloth.

  3. Take three stitches at each side of the eye near edge of the
  cloth to prevent its being lifted when the hook is pulled. Fasten
  thread carefully in cloth near the eye.

_The Hook_

  1. Put the hook into the eye, facing it upward.

  2. Take the other piece of muslin and place double edge just
  meeting the double edge of the first piece. Hold the hook down on
  this piece of muslin where it should come. Mark the place and now
  unfasten the hook from the eye.

[Illustration: and Eye]

  3. Hold hook firmly in place with left thumb and fingers, and
  overhand the two circles of the hooks.

  4. Put needle under the bent part of hook and take four stitches
  in the same place, just under the bent part.

  5. Fasten the thread by taking three stitches close beside the
  hook, then take three stitches on the other side close to hook.
  This secure fastening must be made because of the strain which
  comes on this part of the hook.

[Illustration: Eye showing]

  NOTE: If the eye will show on a garment it is better.


29.―TO MAKE EYELET LOOPS

  Use a piece of muslin three inches square. Fold in half, and
  baste edges. No. 7 needle; No. 36 cotton.

  1. Knot the thread.

  2. One-half an inch from double edge, take four stitches about
  one-quarter of an inch long, over each other; bring needle out at
  lower end.

  3. Turn the cloth and make blanket stitches over the four
  stitches. It is more easily done if the eye, instead of the point
  of the needle, is put through the long stitches.

  4. When the stitches are filled with the blanket stitch, bring
  needle to wrong side of goods near the last blanket stitch taken
  and fasten securely.

[Illustration: Eyelet loop]

“As we have so little time at a lesson, your Seamstress-ship,” said
Fairy Lady, “you will please practice making the loops and putting
on the hooks and eyes during the week.

[Illustration: A lovely girdle]

“A pretty cord for her waist is made by placing two strands of heavy
zephyr yarn together, and twisting each end the opposite way. There,
I see some charming blue in the trunk! You may cut two pieces, each
two yards long, and place them together. I will hold them at one end.
You, at the other. Now, ready:

    The ends in _your_ hand, _left_ you twist;
    To the _right_, I turn _mine_ with the wrist;
    By the _center_, _I_ hold the twisted strand:
    Let go! A rope for dolly,―grand!
    A knot in each end next we tie,
    Then fringe each end, both you and I.
    A girdle for a queen not neater,
    No queen than dolly could be sweeter.”

“Isn’t that a lovely girdle!” exclaimed Mary Frances.

“It is!” agreed Fairy Lady, “and now, with the
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try, finish the bath robe, ready for tacking
the girdle in place.”

[Illustration: Twisting each end opposite way]

“It’s the loveliest thing I’ve ever made,” cried Mary Frances,
holding up the soft woolly robe to view, “and it’s all finished for
my darling Mary Marie,―except the hook and eye.”

[Illustration: “It’s the loveliest thing!”]

“Not quite,” said Sewing Bird Fairy Lady; “we like to teach little
girls to be neat,―and how can Mary Marie hang up her clothes without


30.―LOOPS OF TAPE

_Flat Loops_

  Flat loops are sewed to inside of coat or waist collar, or skirt
  bands.

  1. Cut narrow tape one-half an inch longer than the right length
  for the space in which it is to be used.

  2. Turn under the ends one-quarter of an inch, and baste in place.

  3. Hem down each end on three sides, the width of the tape.

  4. Sew with a double row of stitching across the tape just beyond
  the hemming.

_Towel Loops_

  Are used on towels and on inside of sleeves.

  1. Fold tape to form a point.

[Illustration: Flat loops]

  2. Overhand the two ends together in center, for a distance of
  three-quarters of an inch from the ends.

  3. Turn back the two ends one-quarter of an inch, and baste to
  the hemmed edge of towel, or muslin, and hem down.

  4. Turn to right side. Hem down the cloth to the tape at the
  lower edge of the hem. Fasten thread.

[Illustration: Towel loops]

“Of course,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Why, my dear Sewing Bird Lady,
I couldn’t be neat myself without ‘hangers.’”

“Neither can Mary Marie,” sang Sewing Bird.

   “Could she be sweet,
      Could she be neat,
    From her dear head
      To her cute feet;
    Without the stitches
      Made with care,
    Without a comb
      For her fair hair,
    Without some mending
      Of her clothes,
    Without clean hankies
      For her nose,

[Illustration: Song Sewing Bird]

    Without a patient
      Mother’s sewing?
    But hark! Dear friend,
       You must be going!
         Peep-Peep!”

[Illustration: “Just the thing!” exclaimed Fairy Lady]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XX]

CHAPTER XX

MA CHINE


THE sun shone brightly into the sewing-room; everything was neatly in
place. Sewing Bird was sitting on her perch on the sewing table. Mary
Frances’ work basket was at one end.

[Illustration: Sewing Bird on her perch]

That is the way things looked as Mary Frances peeped in the door to
see what the Thimble People might be doing.

She was just about to enter, when she saw a little fluttering in the
work basket.

“Oh, I do hope they’ll have some fun,” she thought.

Over the edge of the basket peeped the bright little eyes of Silver
Thimble. Then he tumbled out on the sewing table.

“Why didn’t you step over, Silv?” asked Scissors Shears, stepping
over the side of the basket.

“I’ll take steps to find out why,” said Tommy Pin Cushion, rolling
over the side.

“You’ll take steps! Impossible!” exclaimed Emery Bag. “Why, Fatty,
I could get out of the basket as easily as that myself!” And out he
jumped.

[Illustration: Over the edge of the basket]

[Illustration: “Ah, I’ve always been lead!”]

Then out came Pen Cil, carrying a little piece of paper.

“What’s that for?” asked Silver Thimble, pointing to the paper.

“What do you ’spose, Tinkle?” he asked, loftily looking down upon the
little fellow―“to write on.”

“Oh, I ought to have known,” snickered Silver Thimble. “You always do
write!”

“I am the only one of you who does, though,” and Pen Cil hopped on
his one leg to the other end of the table. Jumping up and down, he
began:

“All ready for the grand presentation? Let’s practice!”

“Not so fast! Not so fast! Mr. Pen Cil,” exclaimed Needle Book. “I
lead!”

“Oh, beg your pardon,” said Pen Cil. “I forgot! I’m lead―ah, I’ve
always been lead,” sighing.

“Ha! Ha!” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion, “tied to his miss’s
apron-strings!”

“But where are the rest of us?” called out Scissors Shears.

[Illustration: “Ha! Ha!”]

With that, out sprang all the needles and pins―even a few safety
pins Mary Frances had put in one corner of her work box; all the
buttons, and all the other little findings; so many, Mary Frances
couldn’t see where they came from.

Then Sewing Bird, who had been looking on with interest, began to
sing:

   “Now, listen here,
    This must be clear:
      This Presentation Party
    Is for our little Mistress dear―
      Look out, there, Mr. Smarty!”

as Scissors Shears nearly tumbled off the table.

   “I will take
      The lady’s place,
    And you will pass
      Before my face
    As when she’s here,
    Our Mistress dear,
      At our Presentation Party

[Illustration: Out sprang all the small findings]

   “Now, I will make
      My little speech,
    Then you can follow
      One and each―”

“Except,” interrupted Silver Thimble, “the tiny Tom Thumb Thimble
Folks,” drawing himself up to his full height.

[Illustration: “Speech! Speech!”]

   “They only bow―
    They all know how,”

said Sewing Bird.

“Now, all ready to hear the speech!”

“Speech! Speech!” cried the Thimble People.

Sewing Bird began:

   “Our Mistress dear,
    Your heart to cheer,
      We’re going to give a party;
    And we will evermore be true,
    And everyone of us to you
      Will pledge allegiance hearty.”

[Illustration: Sewing Bird began]

[Illustration:
  13. Drawers
  14. Rompers
  15. Bloomers]


[Illustration: INSERT 4

PATTERNS 13·14·15·

  13. DRAWERS
  14. ROMPERS
  15. BLOOMERS]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.


“Next―”

[Illustration: “I’m Scissors Shears”]

Then came Silver Thimble, bowing before Sewing Bird,

   “I’m Silver Thimble,
    Bright and nimble.”

Then Scissors Shears, bowing,

   “I’m Scissors Shears,
    With rather long ears.”

Then Tommy Pin Cushion,

   “I’m Tomato Pin Cushion―
    (Silv, stop your pushin’!)”

Then Emery Bag,

   “I’m Emery Bag,
    I never brag.”

[Illustration: “I’m Tomato Pin Cushion”]

Then Needle Book,

[Illustration: “I’m Needle Book”]

   “I’m Needle Book,
    Please take a look,
      And do not look awry;
    I hold within
    Without a pin,
      The Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try.”

Then Pen Cil,

   “I always do right.”

“That’s no rhyme!” exclaimed Scissors Shears.

“Well, it sounds better than

   “I’m Pen Cil,
    I present my bill.”

“Now,” said Sewing Bird,

    “The little Tom Thumb Folks
     Will all together bow―”

[Illustration: “Now,” said Sewing Bird]

“Bow, wow, wow!” finished Tommy Pin Cushion, and all the Thimble
People laughed. Their laughing sounded as if the button box had been
upset.

Then the needles and pins and buttons began to bow and dance, making
such a funny sight that Mary Frances nearly laughed aloud.

“Won’t our mistress be pleased with all of us!” exclaimed Tommy Pin
Cushion. “Come, pets!” and the needles and pins flew to him.

“Come, pets!” mimicked Emery Bag, and a few needles left Tommy Pin
Cushion to go to him.

“Piggy!” exclaimed Emery Bag, looking crossly at Tommy Pin Cushion.

“Oh, no,” said Tommy. “I’m just softer-hearted than you,―so they
cling to me.”

“Tee-hee,” laughed Silver Thimble; “but―our little Miss will be
pleased with this party, for―

   “We’re all here,
      We’re all here;
    Ready to see
      Our Mistress dear.”

[Illustration: “Come, pets!”]

Then came a whirring sound,

   “Zee-zee-zee-zee
      Zumm, zumm, zumm,
    Zumm, zumm, zumm,
      Zee-zumm, zee-zumm,
    Zee-zumm, zee-zumm-m-m”

and Mary Frances noticed the Sewing Machine wheels going around.

[Illustration: “Oh, my! Oh my!”]

“Oh, my! Oh, my!” exclaimed Sewing Bird, fluttering her wings and
tugging to get away from the table,

   “What an awful mistake,
    No song I can make―
      We forgot Ma!”

“Forgot whom?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion.

“Forgot me,” zummed Sewing Machine. “All theze dayz, my little onez,
I’ve been hearing theze lovely lezzons―but not one of you, no, not
one, remembered your Ma Chine! Zum! Zum!”

[Illustration: “Zee-zumm, zee-zumm-m-m”]

“What shall we do?” whispered the Thimble People.

   “Listen to what
      I zay, I zay!
    I will take part
      To-day, to-day!”

   “I cannot bear
      A thing like thiz,
    I wished to help
      Our little Mizz,
    Zumm! Zumm!”

[Illustration: Magic and Mystery]

Then all the Thimble People cried together,

   “Oh, Miss Ma Chine,
      Oh, our Ma Chine,
    Forgive us all―
      Don’t make a scene!”

“Zum! Zeee-zeum,” began Ma Chine, when Mary Frances stepped in the
door.

[Illustration: “Listen to what I zay, I zay!”]

“Magic and Mystery,” she said, smiling. “I heard it all―all the
lovely Presentation Party I couldn’t bear to interrupt it―and I do
thank you every one, my dear little friends―and my new friend, Ma
Chine.”

“Zum-zum,” hummed Sewing Machine softly.

[Illustration: “Oh goody! goody!”]

“Some day,” added Mary Frances, “when we have time, we will have the
Grand Presentation Party all over again.”

“Oh, goody! goody! won’t it be grand!” cried the Thimble People.

“To-day’s lesson,” began Fairy Lady, “is to make a kimono for Mary
Marie.”

Mary Frances gravely sat Mary Marie in a chair and opened her trunk.

“That Japanese crepe is just right for the purpose,” said Fairy Lady,
“with this plain lavender three-quarter inch ribbon for trimming.”

“Now comes


PATTERN 6.―DOLL’S KIMONO

See Insert I

  1. Cut out by pattern of bath robe.

  2. Clip several little gashes in the edge of the neck, and turn
  fronts and neck back on right side of goods one-quarter of an
  inch. Crease flat.

[Illustration: Clip several gashes in neck]

  Do the same to the ends of the sleeves.

  3. Lay three-quarter inch ribbon flat on top of the turned edges
  of the kimono. Baste.

  To fit ribbon around curves, gather it along the fuller edge.

[Illustration: Pin band to bottom of sleeve]

  4. Overhand, run, or stitch down the edges along the front
  opening of kimono and sleeves.

  5. Hem, run, or stitch down the opposite edge of the ribbon.

  6. Baste seams of kimono together on right side.

  Try on. Make French seams.

  7. Finish the bottom of kimono with a three-quarter inch hem.

  NOTE.―Instead of ribbon, trimming bands of plain lawn may be
  used. If these are used, proceed in the following manner:

  For neck and fronts, cut band exactly the same shape as the
  opening of kimono, making the band one and a half inches wide.

  Cut two sleeve bands each seven inches long and two inches wide.

  After turning in the edges of kimono opening, turn in the edges
  of the trimming band one-quarter inch.

  Lay it against kimono opening, fitting the neck carefully.

  Fold sleeve bands in half, lengthwise. Crease well.

  Open. Pin band flat against end of sleeve. Stitch one-quarter
  inch from edge. Turn over and crease. Turn down the other side of
  band one-quarter inch. Fold band along the center crease. Bring
  turned-in edge of band over the edge stitched to sleeve.

  Baste. Hem or stitch down.

[Illustration: Fit ribbon around curves]

[Illustration: Fairy Lady smiled]

Fairy Lady gave these directions very slowly, and Mary Frances
followed them carefully. When she came to stitching the band, Sewing
Ma Chine said, “Little Lady Seamstress, please just put that under my
foot, and it will be done in nearly no time.”

“Thank you, Ma Chine, but Mother wouldn’t let me,” said Mary Frances.

“Oh, I’ll be responsible!” said Ma Chine, and as Mary Frances set
the little sleeve under the foot, she began to whirl her wheels so
rapidly, Mary Frances couldn’t see them.

“Oh, thank you,” said the little girl. “Will you do the front
trimming band?”

“Yez, indeed,” said Ma Chine, singing “Zum-zum-zum!”

“Isn’t this delightful, Mary Marie!” exclaimed the little girl. “What
a lot of dear friends we have!”

Then Fairy Lady smiled. “The next is


PATTERN 7.―DRESSING SACK

See Insert I

  1. Cut out by pattern of bath robe, making it only as long as the
  row of pinholes marked Dressing Sack.

[Illustration: “I’ll be responsible”]

  2. Finish the fronts and neck, and sleeves by “pinking,” or
  notching closely with the scissors; or,

  3. Transfer the pattern for scallops given below.

  To do this―With a soft lead pencil, trace scallops through the
  tissue paper.

  Turn the tissue over, and lay the picture of scallops against the
  sleeves (and fronts), and trace over on the wrong side.

[Illustration: Feather Stitching]

  This will leave a penciled outline on the goods.

  Instead of this method, the outline of the scallops may be traced
  through tissue and “carbon” paper.

  With embroidery cotton, work the scallops in blanket stitch.

  THE DRESSING SACK MAY BE FINISHED WITH RIBBON OR BANDS, in just
  the same way as the kimono. Embroider the ribbon or bands with


31.―FEATHER STITCHING

  To learn to make the stitch, use linen canvas 3 in. by 7 in., and
  blunt needle and heavy red working cotton.

  1. Work toward you. Hold canvas over the left forefinger.

  2. Five threads in and down at left hand corner, draw needle
  through from underneath. Let thread hang.

  3. Count one thread to right, point needle downward slanting to
  hole directly beneath the hole needle first came through. Pull
  through.

  4. Repeat, inserting needle one hole to the left instead of
  right. Always let thread fall under point of needle on right side
  of canvas, before pulling it through.

[Illustration: Transfer pattern for scallops]

“Now try it on the bands of the dressing sack.”

“Good!” as Mary Frances held up the samplers. “Here is a puzzle,
riddle, or conundrum:

   “Mary Marie is feather-stitched―
    Yet not a feather is on her.”

Mary Frances laughed. “I wonder how she’d look in feathers,” she
said―

Then Sewing Bird sang:

   “She’d make a fine bird,
    Upon my word,
    She’d sing a sweet song,
    And the only thing wrong―
    Her feathers and song
    Would be tightly glued on!”

“Oh, Sewing Bird!” laughed Mary Frances, shaking her finger, “how did
you know the voice of a ‘talking doll’ was ‘glued on’?”

[Illustration: How did you know the voice of a ‘talking doll’ was
‘glued on’?]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXI]

CHAPTER XXI

AUNT MARIA MAKES A VISIT


   “NOW, one thing more,―
      A pinafore,
    We’ll make for a doll
      We almost adore.”

[Illustration: “A pinafore”]

“A pinafore!―Sewing Bird Lady,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “An apron
for Mary Marie?”

“Yes,” smiled Fairy Lady, “a big apron which she can use as a
dress until you make her some dresses―then she can use it as a
‘cover-me-up’ apron.”

“Oh, good!” said Mary Frances, “and, dear Fairy Lady, I want to tell
you―I’ve a lovely surprise! My Aunt Maria is coming to see us.”

“Aunt Maria―oh, does she love sewing?”

“Indeed she does! She made a bed quilt when she was―let me
see,―maybe―I think―it was when she was two years old.”

“Tee-hee!” giggled Tommy Pin Cushion.

[Illustration: “Tee-hee!”]

“Oh, I beg your pardon,” he said, pretending he had stepped on
Scissors Shears’ toes.

“A-chooo!” said Needle Book, pretending to sneeze.

[Illustration: “A-chooo!”]

“She must have been a wonderful child,” said Fairy Lady.

“She was,” said Mary Frances, “and the loveliest cook ever! She told
me all about it! She almost knew the Kitchen People.”

“Well, I’m glad such a delightful person is coming, I’m sure,” said
Fairy Lady, “but let us have as much done as possible before she gets
here. To do to-day’s lesson, we have to learn the best way for


32.―SEWING ON BUTTONS

  1. Make a pinhole where the button is to be sewed. Thread a No. 7
  needle with No. 36 cotton―the cotton double,―and make a knot.

  2. From the right side put needle down through the cloth in the
  pinhole mark, bringing the knot on the right side. The knot is
  then hidden under the button.

  3. Bring the needle partly through near the knot on the right
  side.

  4. Put the button on needle. Draw needle through.

  5. Take a stitch down through the opposite hole, and put a pin
  through this stitch.

[Illustration: Sewing on buttons]

  6. Sew through the holes, making a cross over the button and pin.

  7. Take out the pin. This will loosen the stitches.

  8. Bring out the needle from under side of cloth, between the
  button and cloth.

  9. Wind the thread around the stitches under the button three or
  four times. This allows for the thickness of the button hole.

[Illustration: “A lady to see you Miss”]

  10. Fasten on the wrong side.

  In sewing a button with a shank or loop, take several over and
  over stitches with double thread.

  If putting on a number of buttons, the button-holes should be
  made first, and the place for buttons be marked through them.

“When does Aunt Maria arrive?” asked Fairy Lady.

“I don’t exactly know,” said Mary Frances.

“Oh, I hope―” began Scissors Shears;―then the bell rang.

“A lady to see you, Miss,” said Katie, coming up-stairs.

“It’s Aunt Maria! It’s Aunt Maria!” exclaimed Mary Frances, jumping
down the stairs, two steps at a time.

[Illustration: Wind thread around stitches]

“Oh, dear Aunt Maria, how perfectly grand!” kissing the old lady
again and again. “Have you had lunch? Grandma always takes an outing
on Wednesday afternoons, and she’ll be so sorry not to be home to
welcome you!”

“But I feel very welcome,” laughed Aunt Maria, “and I have had lunch,
thank you, my dear.”

“Then you can come right up-stairs,” said Mary Frances, leading the
way to the guest-room.

[Illustration: “Come right up-stairs”]

After taking off her hat and smoothing her hair, Aunt Maria began:

“What are you doing, child, all alone this afternoon―are you often
alone? You have no chance to cook here, I imagine.”

“No, Aunt Maria,” said Mary Frances. “I’m very busy, never-the-less.”

“Busy!” exclaimed Aunt Maria; “and what do you do, pray?”

“S’sh! Aunt Maria―it’s another secret!”

“How lovely!” smiled the old lady.

“I’m―” standing on tip-toe to whisper into her aunt’s ear―“I’m
learning to sew.”

“No?” exclaimed Aunt Maria. “Why, my dear child, how―how can you
learn to sew? I know your grandma cannot see to teach you―her eyes
are too weak.”

[Illustration: “I feel very welcome”]

“Aunt Maria,” whispered Mary Frances, “I’ve some little friends who
know all about sewing, who teach me how―but it’s a ‘dead secret,’
and you must never, never, never tell―hope you’ll die if you
do―will you promise―skull and cross-bones?”

[Illustration: “May I see some of your work?”]

“Mercy! Child!” exclaimed the old lady, “what an awful vow! But I’ll
not tell, and if I give my word―”

“Oh, I am sure you won’t, Aunt Maria,―and―some day I’ll be able to
tell you _all_ about it.”

“Is it a book―like the cooking lessons,―that delightful secret? I
won’t tell.”

“My!” thought Mary Frances. “Wouldn’t Sauce Pan laugh!”

“Not exactly like that,” said Mary Frances aloud, “and I know you’ll
never-never tell, Aunt Maria,―but it’s a very-very serious secret,
for nobody knows―not even Mother.”

“May I see some of your work, my dear?”

“I’ll bring some to show you,” she said. “Excuse me, please.”

She stood on the threshold of the sewing room a moment before
entering. All the Thimble People were jumping around in excitement.

[Illustration: “My! wouldn’t Sauce Pan laugh!”]

“I tell you,” tinkled Silver Thimble, “it’s the Aunt!”

“It’s not!” piped the thinnest little voice Mary Frances had ever
heard.

[Illustration: “It’s not!”]

“Hello!” exclaimed Scissors Shears. “That’s little Common Ordinary
Pin! You don’t know! You haven’t much of a head.”

“Maybe not,” answered the thin voice, “but we have some fine points.”

“Ha! ha!” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion.

“And we’re not stuck on ourselves!”

“Ha! ha!” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion again.

“No,” exclaimed Scissors Shears, “you’re stuck on Tommy Pin
Cushion―such taste!”

Mary Frances went into the room.

“Oh,” said Fairy Lady, “I was afraid you might not be alone.”

“Mary Frances!” came Aunt Maria’s voice from nearby.

Every Thimble person fell down where he was, and in a twinkle Fair
Lady became Sewing Bird.

“I thought I wouldn’t trouble you to bring your work to me, so I’ve
followed you to the sewing room,” said the old lady, “I thought I
heard―I’m quite certain I heard some one talking.”

[Illustration: “I was afraid you might not be alone”]

[Illustration:

  17. Fur Lined Cape
  27. Rain Coat]


[Illustration: INSERT 5

PATTERNS 17·27·

  17. FUR LINED CAPE
  27. RAIN COAT]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.

[Illustration: “Goodness!”]

“Oh, my!” thought Mary Frances.

“Goodness!” exclaimed Aunt Maria as they went into the room.
“Although I oughtn’t to say it―what an untidy room! My dear child,
my dear child, everything ought to be put in place just as soon as
you’ve used it. It never pays to lay anything down out of place. Here
are needles and pins, scissors and needle-book, emery bag, and what
not―tumbled over the table, and the work basket on its side! You’ll
learn better, though, child.”

There was a strange expression on the little girl’s face.

“It’s rude, Mary Frances, to smile when you’re in fault,” continued
the old lady.

“Excuse me, Aunt Maria,” said Mary Frances. “I couldn’t help it.”

“Well, I expect it’s because you’re so glad to see me,” said Aunt
Maria, leaning back in her chair and rocking.

[Illustration: Work basket on its side]

[Illustration: “Oh Aunt Maria!”]

“Never mind, we’ll look at your work. Very creditable, very
creditable indeed, child! Such excellent stitches,” examining the
little samplers, and finally the bath robe and kimono. “You certainly
do take after me. To think that so spoiled a child should develop
into such an excellent character! ‘Blood will tell!’ I’ve often said
it―‘Blood will tell!’ What pretty material! By the way, child, where
do you get the goods―if this is a secret?”

“Oh, Aunt Maria, Mother sent me this little trunk full of these
pretty things; and this lovely, lovely doll, Mary Marie, to amuse
myself with. She said she was so sorry not to be able to show me how
to sew, and hopes to, when she comes home. Dear Mother! Won’t she be
surprised?”

“Indeed she will,” said the old lady, examining the contents
of the trunk. “But,” she sniffed, “I am compelled to say less
beautiful goods would have answered the purpose. When I was a little
girl―well, never mind! Have you learned to make button-holes?”

“I can make the stitch, I think,” answered Mary Frances, meekly.

[Illustration: “Indeed she will,”]

“Well, I’ll teach you, child,” said Aunt Maria, getting a piece of
muslin ready. “Now, let us begin to learn how to make


33.―BUTTON-HOLES

[Illustration: Use Button-hole Scissors]

  All button-holes should be worked in a double fold of cloth. Use
  for practice, a piece of muslin six inches long and four inches
  wide. Fold through the center. Turn in and baste along edges.

(A) _To Cut_

  With button-hole scissors, cut into the goods one quarter of an
  inch from folded edge. Cut along a thread of the goods to make it
  straight. Make opening a little longer than the button is broad.
  For button-hole, use No. 40 cotton, No. 8 needle. Barring and
  overcasting are often done with a finer thread than that used for
  the button-holing.

(B) _To Bar_

  1. Make a small knot in thread.

  2. Put the goods over first finger, left hand―folded edge toward
  you.

  3. At the end of button-hole farthest from folded edge of cloth,
  insert needle between the double cloth, bringing it out at A.
  (See picture.)

  4. Point needle down at B; bring it out at A.

  5. Point needle down at C; bring it out at D. Do this twice.

  6. Point needle down at B; bring it out at A.

(C) _Overcasting_

  Overcast the edge on each side and end of the button-hole,
  catching the long “barring” threads.

[Illustration: To Bar      Overcasting]

(D) _Button-hole Stitch_

[Illustration: Button-hole stitch]

  1. With goods over forefinger of left hand, at end of button-hole
  farthest from the folded edge of the cloth, insert needle between
  the muslin; pull through, leaving a small end of thread between
  muslin.

  2. At same corner of button-hole, bring needle half way through.
  Taking both threads hanging from eye of needle between thumb and
  finger of right hand, pass the thread _under_ the point of the
  needle, from right to left. Pull needle through, drawing the
  thread firmly near the button-hole. This forms the purl, which is
  well adapted to the constant wear upon the button-hole.

  3. Repeat until needle is at first stitch taken.

(E) _Finishing_

[Illustration: Finished button-hole]

  1. Make barring stitches over the first barring stitches taken.

  2. Put needle through these barring stitches, forming the blanket
  or loop stitch,―make several loop stitches and bring needle to
  wrong side.

  3. Fasten thread by several small stitches.

  NOTE.―If thread is too short to finish button-holing, fasten it
  on wrong side of material. Enter the new thread on wrong side and
  bring thread through last button-hole purl, or twisted edge.

Aunt Maria gave Mary Frances these directions very slowly, making the
little girl do each step as she explained.

[Illustration: “My, that’s the hardest thing yet”]

“No, not that way, child,” she would say. “Sit up straight; place
both feet firmly on the floor; hold your sewing high; do not
stoop over. That is the correct position while sewing. Throw the
thread more carefully. No, not so long a thread―it will tangle.
Patience―child!”

“My,” exclaimed Mary Frances, “that’s the hardest thing I’ve done
yet. Am I very trying to teach?”

“Well,” said the old lady, “you might be more so―but that’s a real
respectable button-hole. But really, child, I must again repeat my
lesson to you about neatness. Never leave your sewing room as I found
it to-day.”

“There’s Grandma!” exclaimed Mary Frances, looking out the window.
“Come, Aunt Maria, let’s go down.”

“Is my necktie straight?” asked the old lady of Mary Frances, taking
her hand.

[Illustration: “Is my necktie straight?”]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: “She is an old Grunt!”]

“My,” said Mary Frances, returning to the sewing room, “aren’t they
the dear old dears, talking together! A cup of tea and those two
old ladies―there’s nothing under the sun they can’t think of―from
Noah-and-the-ark to Forever-more! I wonder if I can finish Mary
Marie’s pinafore. I’m going to make Angie a lot of clothes like Mary
Marie’s.”

“Will the Old Grunt be back?” Scissors Shears was looking up at Mary
Frances.

“Who?” asked Mary Frances.

“The Old Grunt,” said Scissors Shears, “fussin’ and gruntin’ over
everything. We looked all right. She scared us―if we hadn’t dropped
where we were she might have found out about us―and if she’d found
out about us―we’d been Never-Nevers.”

“You must not call names,” said Mary Frances, gravely.

“She is an Old Grunt! So there! It was my work to teach you to make
button-holes, and I so wanted to do it!” burst out Button-hole
Scissors, excitedly.

He spread his funny little legs apart and looked up at Mary Frances
most forlornly.

“Rip-her-up-the-back! Butty,” growled Scissors Shears.

[Illustration: “It was my work to teach you!”]

“Be quiet!” exclaimed Mary Frances, “I’m ashamed of you both! I know
it’s an awful disappointment to you, Button-hole Scissors, but, never
mind, you shall help me sometime.”

“Magic and Mystery, we must―”

“Yes,” said Fairy Lady, smiling, “we must finish the pinafore. Here is


PATTERN 8.―DOLL’S PINAFORE

See Insert II

  To cut out―

[Illustration: The pinafore is not joined under arms]

  1. Fold goods lengthwise. Place edge of pattern having two rings
  (oo) on this fold. Pin in place. Cut out.

  2. Indicate place for straps and pocket by pricking with a pin,
  through pattern and material. Remove pattern.

  Run a red basting thread through the pinholes.

  3. Cut four straps, and the pocket.

  To make―

  NOTE.―The pinafore is not joined under the arms; therefore,

  1. Make a narrow hem along the sides of the front and back.

  2. Make a three-quarter inch hem along the bottom of pinafore.

  3. Make a tiny clip in the corners of the neck opening.

  Turn down one-quarter inch along neck on right side.

  4. Baste flat against this, one-half inch wide white linen tape.
  In turning corners, turn the tape completely over.

  5. Ends of sleeves, sides of sleeves, and sides and bottom of
  pinafore finished in same way.

[Illustration: Turn tape completely over]

_Pocket_

[Illustration: Pin in place]

  1. Make a quarter-inch hem at top of pocket.

  2. Turn in edges one-eighth inch. Baste.

  3. Pin in place shown on pattern. Hem, or stitch.

_Straps_

  1. Turn in edges of straps one-eighth inch all around.

  2. Baste two straps together, wrong sides facing each other.

  3. Overhand, or stitch together.

  4. Pin in place as shown by red basting thread, and sew in place
  through a button.

  Or, a button may be sewed to the pinafore, and a button-hole
  worked in each end of the straps.

  (If this is done, hem a small piece of goods on the wrong side of
  pinafore under the places for the buttons, so that the pulling of
  the button will not tear the goods.)

[Illustration: Sew strap in place through a button]

“And we’ll all help,―if you please.”

“Thank you, dear Thimble People,” said Mary Frances, spreading the
pretty gingham on the sewing table. “Work very quickly―I haven’t
many minutes. I’m so tired, anyhow,” and she leaned back in her
rocking chair.

[Illustration: “I think you may”]

“Mary Frances, Mary Frances, Mary Frances, dear!” called Grandma’s
voice.

“Oh,” thought Mary Frances, “I’ve been asleep. It’s twilight, nearly.”

“Yes, Grandma,” she called. “I’ll come right down.” And she looked on
the table expecting to see the gingham spread out, but it was nowhere
to be seen.

“Look at Mary Marie,” whispered Sewing Bird.

There sat the proud dolly with the gingham pinafore all made and
buttoned in place.

“How,―how?” stammered Mary Frances.

   “We took her over
      To Thimble Land;
    Over to our
      Fairyland,”

explained Sewing Bird.

“Can I go there some day?” asked Mary Frances.

   “I think you may,
      But not to-day;
    Perhaps you’ll go
      Another day!”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: There sat the proud dolly]

“Oh, thank you, you dear!” said Mary Frances.

“Come, Mary Frances,” again called Grandma. “Why, dear child,” she
said, kissing the little girl, “it’s nearly six o’clock, and we old
ladies have been so busy living in the past that we almost forgot the
present―that’s you.”

[Illustration: I’m learning to sew,” whispered Mary Frances]




CHAPTER XXII

A RUINED DRESS


“SO the Old Grunt had to go home,” said Scissors Shears, standing on
one pointed toe.

[Illustration: “I don’t care a tinkle”]

“Why?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion.

“I don’t care a tinkle,” exclaimed Silver Thimble, “why she went―I’m
only glad we’re to have the little Miss to ourselves once more!”

“Humph!” exclaimed Ma Chine, “if Sewing Bird were awake, little you’d
speak in so cutting a way about an old lady, Scissors!”

“Click! Click! Clickety-click! Rip-her-up-the-back!”
snapped Scissors Shears, making across the table.

“You old Thread Chewer, you!” he exclaimed, “everybody knows you have
wheels in your head! You old Thread Chewer! You―! You! I double dare
you to―”

“Zumm! Zumm! Zumm!” Ma Chine began to whirl.

“Oh, what are the comical things going to do,” thought Mary Frances
at the door. “I do hope no harm will be done! I’ll wait a minute and
see.”

[Illustration: If Sewing Bird were awake]

[Illustration: “Oh, my! Oh, me!”]

“Oh, my!” moaned Scissors Shears. “Oh, me! I’m almost undone!”

Suddenly Scissors Shears stumbled and fell flat on the table, his
feet being all entangled in the folds of some pink lawn.

“Zumm! Zumm!” whirled Ma Chine. “Why don’t you come? Come on,
Sweet-tempered!”

“Undone!” exclaimed Sewing Bird. “I think you’re done-up,―

   “Oh, how it shames
    To call bad names!
    And temper lost
    Makes heavy cost!”

“Sewing Bird, that’s true!” exclaimed Scissors Shears, getting up,
“Oh, the dear little Miss! Oh, what a lesson! I’m so sorry I lost my
temper!”

“What can he have done?” thought Mary Frances, peeping in the door.

There on the sewing table was Scissors Shears looking woefully upon a
pretty little doll’s dress carefully cut out and pinned together. All
over it were gashes and slashes where his sharp feet had cut into
the material.

[Illustration: All over it were gashes]

[Illustration: “Good afternoon!” she said]

“What shall I do,” began Scissors Shears, “oh, Sewing Bird, what
shall I do?―There’s no other goods! I took such care to make that so
perfect,―ready for the little lady’s lesson to-day!”

“Come!” said Mary Frances to herself. “That’s enough! Poor old
Scissors Shears!―I’ll pretend not to notice it.

“Good-afternoon!” she said going into the sewing room, “I’ve changed
my mind, dear Sewing Bird Lady―I think I’d like to use some other
goods rather than that I left on the table for this lesson. I’ll
just throw this aside in a little bundle,”―pushing the ruined dress
aside,―“and may I use this pretty pink chambray gingham to-day?”

“The very thing!” exclaimed Fairy Lady, “much better than lawn, for a
morning dress; and here is


PATTERN 9.―DOLL’S MORNING DRESS

See Insert II

  1. Cut out in same way as pinafore.

  2. For neck-band, use a six-inch square of white lawn.

[Illustration: “The very thing!”]

  Fold through the center. Fold again through the center.

  3. Place neck-band pattern on the lawn, having the edges which
  are marked with two rings (oo) each on a fold.

  4. Pin in place. Cut out. Open. Make tiny clip in each corner of
  the neck opening.

  5. Cut sleeve-bands of white lawn, with double rings (oo) on fold
  of cloth.

[Illustration: Edges marked oo each on a fold]

  To make―

  1. Turn over opening of neck of dress one-eighth inch on right
  side. Crease, without stretching. Baste.

  2. Turn both edges of neck-band down one-eighth inch, on same
  side of goods. Crease, without stretching.

  3. Spread the dress open on the table.

  Lay neck-band with turned-in edge against turned-in edge of dress
  neck. Pin in place. Baste.

  Stitch; or, overhand and hem, in place.

  4. Turn up ends of sleeves, and sew sleeve-bands in place in the
  same way.

  5. Make placket by directions given on next page.

  Make three button-holes on right hand side. Sew three buttons on
  left hand side.

  6. Join under-arms with French seams.

  7. Make a three-quarter inch hem in bottom of dress.

“I’ll cut that out quickly,” said Mary Frances, pinning the pattern
on the goods.

[Illustration: Pin neck-band in place]

[Illustration: “The back is just like the front”]

“Mark the place where the pocket goes,” said Fairy Lady.

“Why,” she exclaimed at length, holding up the little dress, “the
back is just like the front, and the neck is too little for her head
to slip through.”

“Exactly!” smiled Fairy Lady looking pleased. “You are very
observant.”

“That’s a lovely word!” thought Mary Frances. “I’ll remember it.”

“You may now fold the dress lengthwise, and from the neck, cut down
the middle of the back four inches, which will make the opening large
enough for her head―and learn about


34.―MAKING A PLACKET,

which is the finished opening of a dress or skirt.

  1. Cut one piece of cloth like the dress―two inches wide, and as
  long as the dress opening.

  2. Cut another piece one inch wide and as long as the opening.
  Fold in half the long way, and crease.

  3. On the right hand side of the opening, face the raw edge back
  on the wrong side with the narrow piece of cloth.

  4. On the left hand side, sew the wider piece of cloth, as if
  for facing,―but after turning in the edge, fold on the creased
  middle fold, bringing edge exactly over the first sewing.

[Illustration: Extension Placket]

[Illustration: Hemmed Placket]

  This is an Extension Placket.

  This piece can be used without folding: then the edge must be
  hemmed.

  There should be two rows of stitching across the bottom of the
  placket to strengthen it.

       *       *       *       *       *

  On this page are pictures of two other kinds of placket.

  To make a Hemmed Placket, sew a narrow hem on left side, and
  broad hem on right hand side. Fold broad hem over narrow, and
  stitch in place across lower end.

  A Tape Placket is very useful in making petticoats. Face the
  opening with flat tape.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fairy Lady handed Mary Frances a sheet of paper.

“Where did this come from?” asked Mary Frances.

“It’s a fairy paper,” answered Fairy Lady. “That’s all I can tell.”

“It is beautiful!” said Mary Frances, holding the picture of the
plackets in her hand, “Thank you.”

“Can you tell me what to do next?” asked Fairy Lady.

“Yes,” answered Mary Frances, “I must work in this order in making my
dolly’s dresses:

[Illustration:

  Tape Placket.      Tape folded.]

[Illustration: 18. Afternoon Dress]

[Illustration: 20. Party Dress (see INSERT 10)]


[Illustration: INSERT 6

PATTERN 18·

18. AFTERNOON DRESS]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.

  1. Basting of seams.

  2. Fitting.

  3. Altering, if necessary.

  4. Sewing seams.

  5. Facing the neck with the fitted facing.―Baste that on wrong
  side; then turn to the right side; turn in, and hem down.

  6. Facings on the sleeves in same way.

  7. Pocket hemmed at top. Turned in, and basted in place; stitched
  in place.

  8. Buttons and button-holes.

“That’s your week’s work,” said Fairy Lady, “if you finish it for the
next lesson, I’ll be so proud.”

“And so will I!” laughed Mary Frances, resolving to work hard.
“Good-day, dear Thimble People.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“I’ll help her if I dare,” said Scissors Shears.

“What could you do, now?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion. “You’re in
disgrace!”

“He could only undo,” said Needle Book.

“That will do!” said Sewing Bird.
[Illustration: “What shall I do?” began Scissor Shears]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXIII]

CHAPTER XXIII

THE FLANNEL PET


“DON’T you want to go with Grandma to-day?” asked her grandmother of
Mary Frances.

“Where, Nanny?” inquired the little girl.

[Illustration: “I dearly love monkeys”]

“Well,” said Grandma, “I’m going to take a trolley ride through the
park.”

“Where the monkeys are?” inquired Mary Frances.

“Yes,” said Grandma. “I thought you’d like to share my ‛afternoon
out.’”

“I dearly love monkeys,” said Mary Frances. “They crinkle up their
faces so!”

“Come, then,” said Grandma, “get your hat!”

Mary Frances ran up-stairs. This is what she heard:

“I do hope the little lady will have it finished!”

“What does she make to-day?”

“The flannel pet―”

“Oh, good!”

[Illustration: “Where the monkeys are?”]

“That’s Silver Thimble,” thought Mary Frances.

“Why do you say ‘Oh, good’?” asked Scissors Shears.

[Illustration: “Oh, good!”]

“Because,” answered Silver Thimble, “I know what fun she’ll have. I
feel closer to my little Miss than any of you others can.”

“Ha!” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion, “but not love her better.”

“The dear things!” thought Mary Frances, “and I was going to run
away! What can a flannel pet be? Is it a flannel cat, or rabbit, or
dog?”

“Mary Frances!” called Grandma.

“Listen, Nanny,” said the little girl leaning over the banister,
“will you feel much disappointed, dear Nanny, if I don’t go? I―I―”

“Why, no, my child!” said Grandma. Mrs. Bennett is going with me,
so I’ll have company, but I thought you’d be lonely. Good-bye,
dear,―take a nap if you feel like it.”

“Good-bye, Nanny dear,” smiled Mary Frances, throwing the old lady a
kiss. “She really does spoil me, I fear,” she thought. “I never had
my own way so exactly before.”

[Illustration: “Good-bye, Nannie dear”]

[Illustration: She dressed Mary Marie]

She dressed Mary Marie in the new morning dress.

“I certainly wish she had some petticoats,” thought the little girl,
taking her into the sewing room.

   “Oh, what fun!
    I see it’s done!
    Quite in distress,
    Without this dress,
    Would be, you see,
    Our Sweet Marie,”

sang Sewing Bird, admiring the morning dress.

“But the button-holes,” said Mary Frances, “are pretty poor, I must
say!”

“That’s because the Old Grunt taught you―” began Scissors Shears.

“Oh, my!” exclaimed Mary Frances.

“I forgot! I forgot!” said Scissors Shears. “I did, really and truly!
your Seamstress-ship. Will you please forgive me?”

   “Scissors and Shears
    Now, change your ears,”

laughed Mary Frances, and the funny little long-eared fellow was on
the table.

[Illustration: “I wish she had some petticoats”]

[Illustration: “I like my ears”]

“I’m sure I’ll not be able to use you to-day,” said Mary Frances,
“with those ears.”

“You tell me what to do,” said Scissors Shears, wagging his ears back
and forward. “I like my ears. They do not help me work―but I can
hear almost anything with them. I can hear what Tommy Pin Cushion is
thinking.”

“Goodness!” exclaimed Tommy Pin Cushion. “You must be most unhappy!”

Mary Frances laughed.

“What is to-day’s lesson?” she asked.

Sewing Bird began to sing:

   “I see you haven’t guessed it yet―
    It’s just a little flannel pet.
    A period after pet. you’ll note;
    It’s short for flannel petticoat.
            Oh, de de dum dum!
            De-dee-dee!
            No one could guess it―
            That I see.”

[Illustration: “Goodness! You must be most unhappy”]

[Illustration: “Oh, thank you!”]

“Oh, Magic and Mystery,” laughed Mary Frances, “Mary Marie will be
delighted! She seems so chilly these days. I think she will soon be
able to say a few words. I tried to think she said ‘Ma-ma’ to me
to-day.”

“It is lovely to help make things for so sweet a child,” smiled Fairy
Lady.

“That is a great compliment,” said Mary Frances, “to her mother.”

“It isn’t only her lovely face,” said Fairy Lady; “it’s her charming
manners.”

“Oh, thank you!” said Mary Frances, “to a mother who tries to teach
the best to her child, that is most pleasing to hear.”

“There is even more in seeing her mother’s manner than in teaching
her, I think,” said Fairy Lady.

Mary Frances blushed with pleasure.

“And now,” said Fairy Lady, “ready for


PATTERN 10.―DOLL’S FLANNEL PETTICOAT

  Suggestions for material,―white woolen flannel.

  1. Make a pattern of ordinary wrapping paper.

  Use a ruler, making the pattern nine and one-half inches long,
  and five inches wide.

[Illustration: Use a ruler]

[Illustration: Felling on Flannel]

  2. Mark with two rings (oo) and an arrow (➸) as in picture.

  To cut out―

  1. Place end of pattern having two rings, on a lengthwise fold of
  material. Pin in place. Cut out.

  To make―

  (A) Leave one and one-half inches of the seam unsewed, for making
  of placket.

  Below this, join seam by


35.―FELLING ON FLANNEL

  A fell is a seam hemmed down to prevent edges from raveling.

  NOTE.―To learn to make a fell, use two pieces of flannel, each
  six inches long, and three inches wide. Practise with these,
  before attempting the fell on the petticoat.

  1. Place the pieces of flannel together, one edge extending
  one-eighth of an inch beyond the other.

  2. Baste a narrow seam. Stitch.

  3. Remove the bastings.

  4. Turn to other side of goods. With a warm iron, press the seam
  with wider side covering the narrower. Do not open it.

  In felling flannel, do not turn the wider part of the seam in,
  but leave it open, and baste down flat after pressing.

  Catch-stitch it down instead of hemming.

  (B) Make a Hemmed Placket.

  Do not turn flannel twice; but, after pressing, catch-stitch down
  over the raw edges.

[Illustration: To cut flannel petticoat pattern]

  (C) To Hem Petticoat.

  1. Turn up one-quarter inch on wrong side, at bottom of skirt.

  Baste, and press.

  Remove bastings.

  2. Turn up again on wrong side, three-quarters of an inch,
  measuring and basting carefully. Press.

  3. Feather-stitch in place along top of hem.

  Remove bastings.

[Illustration: Feather stitch hem]

  (D) Gather the top of petticoat.

  1. Cut a notch in the middle of the front of petticoat.

  2. Thread needle with No. 40 cotton. Use cotton double.

  Gather petticoat at top, commencing at notch, gather first in one
  direction, then in the other.

  3. Leave knots in each end of the threads.

  Make thread a little shorter than the length of the flannel.

  NOTE.―This petticoat is not to be sewed to a band; but is
  attached later, to Doll’s Underwaist.

Mary Frances had the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try in her hand, and
soon finished the petticoat.

“Good!” exclaimed Fairy Lady. “Now comes


PATTERN 11.―DOLL’S UNDERWAIST

See Insert III

  To cut out―

  1. Pin pattern with arrow edge on a lengthwise fold of lawn.

[Illustration: Pin on lengthwise fold of lawn]

  2. Cut two underwaists just alike.

  3. Clip a small notch (V) in the exact center of the bottom of
  each waist.

  To make―

  1. Baste the shoulder seams of one waist together. (_a_ to _a_;
  and _b_ to _b_.)

  Try on doll.

  Alter if necessary.

[Illustration: Try on doll]

  2. Stitch one-quarter inch from the edge.

  Open and flatten the seams.

  3. Turn in edges along the back one-quarter inch. Baste.

  Turn up bottom of waist one-quarter inch. Baste.

  4. Clip several small gashes along the neck.

  Turn in the edge of neck one-eighth of an inch. Baste.

  Do the same to the armholes.

  5. Do the same to the other waist.

  6. Pin and baste the two waists together, wrong sides facing
  each other. Overhand (or stitch) all edges together, _except the
  bottom_, which is left open for the flannel petticoat.

  7. To join flannel petticoat to underwaist―Insert gathers of
  petticoat between the two waists. Pin notches together, and baste
  in place. Hem down.

  8. Sew three buttons on left side of back of waist: one at the
  neck, one in the center, one at the bottom. Make the button-holes
  on the other side of back of waist.

  9. Sew one button at center front of waist, to fasten the lawn
  petticoat.

[Illustration: Overhand all edges together]

“Scissors Shears, do your best,” whispered Mary Frances, cutting into
the muslin for the dolly’s underwaist.

She felt Scissors Shears spring in her fingers.

“And now, not a word until it is finished!”

“What darlings!” she exclaimed, finally, holding up the little
underwaist and flannel petticoat.

“Are they finished?” asked Fairy Lady, leaning forward in her rocking
chair.

“Yes, all finished! If it hadn’t been for the
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try, I’d have been a week doing them, I’m
sure,” said Mary Frances.

“I’ll put them right on Mary Marie,” she added, “she seems so cold.”

   “How must it be,
      How must it be,
    To be beloved
      As well as she?”

sang Sewing Bird.

“You are, dear Sewing Bird,” said Mary Frances. “Oh, dear little
Sewing Bird, indeed, you are!”

[Illustration: “Good!” exclaimed Fairy Lady]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXIV]

CHAPTER XXIV

THE WHITE PET


   “WE’RE not through yet,―
      There’s the white pet.
      Let’s not forget―”

[Illustration: Sang Sewing Bird]

“Oh, I know what the white pet is, Sewing Bird,” interrupted Emery
Bag. “It’s a white mouse! One of my uncles had a whole side eaten out
of him by one of those sweet pets. I won’t forget!”

   “Oh, my! oh, me!
      Let that be wrote,
    A _mouse_ is not
      A petticoat!”

sang Sewing Bird.

“Oh, you simple thing!” exclaimed Emery Bag. “Why didn’t you say
‘petticoat,’ then?”

[Illustration: “One of my uncles had a side eaten out”]

[Illustration: “If that is true Then this will do”]

   “If I take time
    To make a rhyme,
      A rhyme it then must be:
    If words won’t rhyme
    At any time―
      I cut them short, you see,”

sang Sewing Bird.

Then Emery Bag:

   “If that is true
    Then this will do:
    To Sewing Bird
    Any old word
    Will make a rhyme,
    If shortened hyme.

Isn’t that beautiful?”

“What does ‘hyme’ mean?” cried Sewing Bird.

“I haven’t made up my mind, yet, what it means,” said Emery Bag.
“Sewing Bird, you’ve got an awfully swelled head since―”

[Illustration: “What does ‘hyme’ mean?”]

“Nobody without a heart of steel would dare say such things to
Sewing Bird. Isn’t he brave?” whispered Tommy Pin Cushion.

[Illustration: “Reddy yourself!”]

“A Brave’s an Indian. I’m not an Indian!” retorted Emery Bag.

“Ready to fight any one!” said Tommy Pin Cushion.

“Reddy yourself!” exclaimed Emery Bag.

“Here!” exclaimed Scissors Shears. “Here is some muslin on the table.
I’ll cut out the white pet,―petty,―petticoat! That’s parsed now, I
guess!”

“It’s not fit!” replied Emery Bag.

“It’s not fight, you mean,” interrupted Scissors Shears.

“It’s not fitted, you mean,” exclaimed Tommy Pin Cushion.

“It’s not fit! I tell you!” again exclaimed Emery Bag.

“Well, Red-in-the-face―, Brave,” interrupted Scissors Shears,
“what’s not fit?”

“It’s all in the fit,” sullenly muttered Emery Bag.

“How do you know?” exclaimed Tommy Pin Cushion. “Did you ever have a
fit?”

“Of course, I have! Whenever I have my cover on!”

[Illustration: “Ready to fight anyone!”]

[Illustration: Sang Emery Bag bowing]

   “Come what, come will,
      Then, this is it:
    It is not fit
      To fit a fit;
    If a fit fits you
      And you fit a fit,
    Put it on
      As you would a mit:
    Some say fight,
      But I say fit;
    If you want to make sure,
      Come try it!
    And this is double trouble―”

sang Emery Bag, bowing.

Everybody looked puzzled.

“It’s plain he’s in a fit,” exclaimed Scissors Shears.
“Rip-him-up-the-back!―If I don’t get to work, there’ll be no
petticoat to fit on Mary Marie,” and he dived into the muslin.

“Where’s the pattern?” he asked, looking up. “Oh, where’s the
pattern, Sewing Bird?”

Then Sewing Bird began:

[Illustration: “Oh, woe, alas! Oh, woe is me!”]

[Illustration:

  21. Coat (FRONT)
  21. Coat (BACK)]


[Illustration: INSERT 7

PATTERN 21

21. COAT]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.

[Illustration: “Magic and Mystery!”]

   “Oh, woe, alas!
      Oh, woe is me!
    Whenever they quarrel so,
      Can’t you see―
    Without this petty history―
      No pattern is for you or me,
    Without ‛Magic and Mystery!’
      Oh, woe! and more alases!”

“Magic and Mystery!” exclaimed Mary Frances standing in the doorway.

All the other Thimble People pretended to be asleep.

“Thank you, my dear!” exclaimed Sewing Bird Fairy Lady. “When they
quarrel so, I cannot change from Sewing Bird into Fairy Lady without
help,―but now,”―she added happily, “here is


PATTERN 12.―DOLL’S LAWN PETTICOAT

  1. Cut a pattern of ordinary wrapping paper, making it twelve
  inches long, and five and one-half inches wide.

  2. Mark on one end, two rings (oo) and an arrow (➸).

  3. To mark tuck―

[Illustration: “Thank you, my dear!”]

  At one end, measure up two and one-half inches from bottom of
  pattern. Mark with a dot. Do same at other end.

  Join these marks with a straight line.

  Write along this line the word―TUCK.

  One-quarter inch above this line, draw dotted line.

  One-quarter inch below tuck line, draw dotted line.

[Illustration: Tracing wheel]

  To cut out―

  1. Pin arrow end of pattern on a lengthwise fold of white dimity
  or lawn. Cut out.

  2. Marking tuck.―With a large pin, prick through pattern and
  lawn, along the tucking lines, making holes about half an inch
  apart; or, mark lines with a tracing wheel against a ruler.

  3. Cut Band for Petticoat by Pattern 11.

  See Insert III.

  To make―

  1. Join ends of petticoat with felled seam, making seam but three
  inches long, leaving it open above that, in order to make a
  placket.

  2. In making a placket, use one-quarter of an inch hem on left
  hand side, and one-half an inch hem on right hand side. Fold
  broad hem over narrow; secure at lower end with two rows of
  stitching.

  3. Make the tuck.


36.―MAKING TUCKS

  (_a_) Crease material back along the middle row of pinholes.

[Illustration: To mark tuck]

  (_b_) Stitch tuck on upper side, sewing through the other rows of
pinholes.

[Illustration: Overhand lace to hem]

  NOTE.―In making several tucks, mark in the same way, and
  proceed in a like manner; but remember to cut the material
  sufficiently long to allow for the making.

  4. Make a three-quarter inch hem at the bottom of petticoat.

  5. Gather top in same way as flannel petticoat.

  6. Set the gathers into petticoat band, as in making the
  little “tie around” apron.

  (See 21.―Setting Gathers in Band.)

  7. Make button-holes in band: one in center front, cutting it
  _across_ the band; and one in each end of band, cutting it
  _in the direction of the length of the band_.

  8. Overhand half-inch lace edging to the hem. A half yard of
  edging will be needed.

“And I’m going to shut my eyes and go to sleep while you do it,” said
Fairy Lady, leaning back in the rocking chair.

She looked so beautiful, Mary Frances would have liked to kiss
her―then just to sit still, and look at her; but she thought,

“When she is so dear and kind, and when all the Thimble People want
to help me so much, I ought not to loiter.”

[Illustration: Make button-holes in band]

[Illustration: “I’m here!” said a little tiny voice]

“I’m here!” said a little tiny voice, and, to be sure, it was Silver
Thimble.

“And I!”―it was Needle Book.

“And I!”―Scissors Shears.

“And will you all help?” asked Mary Frances. “I’m so glad!―and then
I’ll have to do only the new lesson?”

“Only the new,―and here’s the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try,” said
Needle Book.

“Why, everything’s nearly done!” exclaimed the little girl in a few
minutes. “What wonderful people the Thimble People are!”

“And now,” smiled Fairy Lady, “ready for


PATTERN 13.―DOLL’S DRAWERS

See Insert IV

  To cut out―

  1. Pin arrow edge of pattern to lengthwise fold of goods,
  clipping notches carefully.

  2. Remove pattern, and cut another leg just like this one.

  3. Cut band by pattern of petticoat band.

  To make―

  1. Make a three-quarter inch hem at the bottom of each piece.

[Illustration: “Here’s the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try”]

  2. Make French seams, or a fell, from bottom of each piece to
  notch.

  3. Make one-eighth inch hem from notch on each side, to top.

  4. Gather each piece at top.

  5. Pin the end of one narrow hem to double notch (VV) in top of
  other piece.

  6. Pin the center of the then-double material to the center of
  the band, spreading the fullness of the gathers to the hips and
  back only―_no fullness in front_.

  7. Make button-hole in right hand end of band.

  Sew button on other end.

  NOTE.―If trimming is desired,―cut two ruffles, each five inches
  long, and one and one-half inches wide; and learn to make


37.―WHIPPED RUFFLE

[Illustration: Whipped ruffle]

  1. Hem the lower edge of ruffles, and overhand lace on the hem.

  2. Roll the upper edge of the muslin to the right side of goods,
  as you have rolled paper edges. Do not fold it. Practice rolling
  paper if the muslin seems difficult to manage.

  3. With a No. 6 needle, and No. 40 cotton, overcast the rolled
  edge, taking the stitches no deeper than the roll.

  4. Draw ruffle up to size needed.

  5. Fell the two ends of each ruffle together; and overhand the
  ruffles to the legs of the drawers, sewing into each “whipping”
  or overcasting stitch as nearly as possible.

  NOTE.―Fine goods whip more easily than coarse.

[Illustration: Put into band]

Mary Frances looked at Fairy Lady.

“She’s sound asleep,” she thought. “Won’t I surprise her!”

       *       *       *       *       *

“What, all finished?” laughed Fairy Lady.

“Where were you, dear Fairy Lady?” asked Mary Frances.

“I was here―and tapes and tapes away;―away―away―away in Fairy
Thimble Land.”

[Illustration: “She’s sound asleep,―won’t I surprise her!”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXV]

CHAPTER XXV

CAN THE DOLLY TALK


“SAY, are you a really-person? Say, I say, are you real? You look so
swell and so beautiful,―can you talk?―say, can you? I wonder if I
can touch you, you pretty Mary Marie.”

[Illustration: “Can you talk?”]

Scissors Shears took a step nearer the doll.

“My, I wish you could talk! I’d like you to hold this muslin for me
while I cut out your rompers. What! You won’t talk? You just sit
looking at me―Stupid! You must think I want something to do! Humph!
I wouldn’t be a doll, no!

   “I wouldn’t be a dolly, a dolly, a dolly!
    I’d rather be a polly, a polly, a polly!
    For a dolly can’t talk,
    And a polly can talk;
    And a dolly can’t walk,
    And a polly can walk;
    I wouldn’t be a dolly, a dolly, a dolly!
    I’d rather be a polly, a polly, a polly.

[Illustration: “You just sit looking at me―Stupid!”]

“‛Pretty Poll!’ she can say―‛Pretty Doll!’―try it! Say,
please try it, Mary Marie! Try it! I say! Doll, try it! If
you don’t, you’ll be sorry! Say ‛Pretty Doll!’ say it! I say;
or,―I’ll-cut-your-acquaintance;―then what’ll you do?

[Illustration: “Pretty Doll!”]

       *       *       *       *       *

“You won’t get your rompers―maybe;

       *       *       *       *       *

“You won’t get your bloomers―maybe;

       *       *       *       *       *

“You won’t get your pajompers―maybe.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Oh, you make me tired, you pretty, proud, sweet, lovely-looking
thing! Speak, I say, speak! Say ‛Bow-wow-wow!’ if you can’t talk, or
even say ‛Meow!’

       *       *       *       *       *

“I’ll give it up, I guess. My, I should think she’d be ashamed not to
thank us at all for her fine clothes.”

[Illustration: “Please try it, Mary Marie”]

[Illustration: “Look out there, don’t fall”]

“Oh, she’s only a baby!” said Tommy Pin Cushion. “Babies can’t talk!”

“Humph, I s’pose you know, ’cause you’re a cry-baby!” exclaimed
Scissors Shears.

“I’m not a cry-baby!” exclaimed Tommy Pin Cushion.

“Yo’ are! Yo’ are!” cried Scissors Shears. “I can prove it!”

“I’m not! Am I, Sewing Bird,―am I?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion, the
tears rolling down his fat red cheeks.

“If you could see yourself, you’d know you are!” snapped Scissors
Shears.

“Look out there, don’t fall!” cried Yard Stick, seeing Scissors
Shears toppling dangerously on the table edge.

“Oh, look out yourself,” snapped Scissors Shears, “you’re just as
likely to―”

“I always stand firmly on my three feet,” retorted Yard Stick.

“It takes a whole yard to hold them―ha-ha!” laughed Scissors Shears.

Then interrupted Sewing Bird, singing:

[Illustration: “I’m not a cry-baby!”]

          “Come, come!
           You’re all in fun―
           So why get mad,
           And make all sad?
    The little Miss may hear―
    So, Tommy, dry up every tear,
    And, Thimble, sheath your little spear,
    And, Scissors, don’t you act so queer,
    Or else your Mistress may appear.”

[Illustration: “Come, come! You’re all in fun―”]

Just at that moment in stepped Mary Frances, who had heard every
word. The Thimble People looked silly; but she pretended not to
notice.

“Oh, my dear Magic and Mystery,” she said, “to-day I had another
letter from my mother, and she says:

“‘Perhaps you can try to learn a few stitches from the patterns I
send you by mail, and you can send me the samplers you make. They
will be Sewing Lessons by Mail, and we’ll pretend you are taking a
Correspondence Course.’

“Oh, Sewing Bird Fairy Lady,―if it doesn’t seem a trifle
dis-re-spect-a-ble,―I mean dis-re-spect-ful, ―my mother’s stitches
aren’t as nice as mine! Look!”

[Illustration: “Sewing Lessons by Mail”]

[Illustration: Fairy Lady smiled thoughtfully]

Mary Frances held up the sampler.

“I want to know what is the right thing to do, Fairy Lady, I would
love to surprise my dear mother when I get home; and yet I don’t want
to deceive her by not telling her that I know something about sewing.
What shall I do?”

Fairy Lady smiled thoughtfully. “You might tell her you have a little
friend who―”

“Excuse me―friends!” corrected Silver Thimble.

“‛Friends,’” repeated Fairy Lady, “who taught you a little about
sewing. It would make your mother happy, I should think.”

“Yes!” nodded Mary Frances. “Of course, that’s right! And I will feel
much nearer to my mother then, and can tell her some day. Do you
know, Sewing Bird Fairy Lady―I would,―even as much as I love my
dear Grandma,―I would be ex-ceed-ing-ly lonely without my Thimble
People.”

“Lottie, who lives across the street,” she went on, “is lots of fun.
I want to teach her to sew some day―may I, Fairy Lady?”

[Illustration: “Lottie is lots of fun”]

“Oh, to be sure,” said Fairy Lady, “after you have finished with us.”

“But I don’t want you to be Never-Nevers!” said Mary Frances.

“Perhaps there’ll be a way,” suggested Fairy Lady.

[Illustration: “For Billy”]

“How delightful!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Oh, I want to show you the
pillow cover I bought to-day for Billy.”

“How lovely!” exclaimed Scissors Shears, Silver Thimble, Needle Book,
Tommy Pin Cushion, and Emery Bag, all at once.

“Yes, isn’t it? Let me read you his letter:”

  _Woodcraft Camp._

  _Dear Mary Frances:_

  _Glad to hear Grandmother is well. Say, I wish you knew how to
  sew! Some of the fellows have the swellest sofa pillows on their
  cots. Maybe you’ll learn some day. Mother wrote me about the
  lessons she wants to give you by mail. It’s a rattling good idea.
  (I crossed out “rattling” because we’re not encouraged to use
  slang.)_

  _See you in September. So long!_

  _Good-bye,      Billy._

[Illustration: “How delightful!”]

“So you see, Fairy Lady, it is almost absolutely necessary for me to
learn to sew.”

[Illustration: “How―?” began Needle Book]

“On buttons,” said Needle Book.

Mary Frances laughed. “Yes, that was a necessity, and I suppose the
pillow is a luxury, but I am so pleased that I can make it. See, it
has a flag to be worked in red, white, and blue.”

“How―?” began Needle Book.

“Why, same as I did the kittens on the doll’s apron,” said Mary
Frances.

“Of course!” smiled the Fairy Lady.

“And you don’t need help with it! Isn’t that fine! The sooner we
finish the lesson,―” began Scissors Shears.

“Hush!” said Fairy Lady, holding up her bodkin wand.

Scissors Shears fell down. “Excuse _me_!” he exclaimed.

“Oh, yes,” said Mary Frances. “What is to-day’s lesson, please? I’m
wasting time!”

[Illustration: “Excuse _me!_”]

“Well,” smiled Fairy Lady, “it doesn’t matter so much now,―for
the King of Thimble Land sent you this package, saying to read the
instructions and to ask me any questions you wish at next lesson, if
you do not understand―and he will give you the greatest honor ever
bestowed upon a little girl―he will―”

[Illustration: The metal Sewing Bird]

“Lend you―even when not in lessons―the
Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try,” finished Needle Book, bowing before
Mary Frances.

“Oh, please bear to His Majesty my gratefulest gratitude!” said Mary
Frances, wondering if that were the right way to send a message to a
King.

“Oh, my goodness!” screamed Fairy Lady, turning almost white.
“There’s a cat!” And she immediately changed into the metal sewing
bird on the edge of the table.

“It’s only Jubey!” laughed Mary Frances, “Aunt Maria sent her to me
for fear I’d be lonely. I’ll never let you come here again, Jubey,”
she said, picking up the kitten.

Then she opened the package from the King of Thimble Land, and this
is what she found:


PATTERN 14.―DOLL’S ROMPERS

See Insert IV

  To cut out―

  1. Fold goods crosswise. Lay pattern with edge having two rings
  (oo) on the fold.

[Illustration: “It’s only Jubey!”]

  2. Pin in place. Cut out.

[Illustration: Fold _lengthwise_ and _crosswise_]

  3. With a large pin, prick through the rows of pinholes marked
  FRONT. Or use a tracing wheel.

  4. Remove pattern.―Spread the rompers open on a table. Cut _one
  end_ of rompers off, along the rows of pinholes.

  To cut Neck Band―

  Cut a piece of white lawn ten inches long and five inches wide.

  5. Fold lawn crosswise.

  6. Fold lawn lengthwise. Pin.

  7. Place pattern with both the edges having double rings (oo) on
  _folded_ edges of lawn.

  Pin in place. Cut out.

  To cut Belt―

  Cut a piece of lawn fourteen inches long, and four inches wide.
  Fold _lengthwise_, and _crosswise_.

  8. Pin pattern with both edges having double rings (oo) on a fold
  of lawn. Cut out.

  9. Cut sleeve-band with double rings on crosswise fold of lawn.

  To make―

  1. Turn in both edges of the neck-band one-eighth inch. Baste.

  2. Lay rompers flat upon table, and pin and sew neck-band in
  place in the same way as in Morning Dress.

  3. Fold rompers _lengthwise_. From the neck, cut a placket down
  the fold five inches. _Be certain to cut placket in the back_ of
  the rompers. The back is longer from the neck line than the front.

[Illustration: Run elastic in the hem]

  4. Make placket as in Morning Dress. Fasten with buttons and
  button-holes.

  5. Join rompers under arms with French seam.

  6. Join curved edges with French seam.

  7. Make a half-inch hem at end of each leg. _Leave the hem open_
  one-half inch at the top. Through this opening run a narrow elastic.
  After joining ends of elastic, finish the hemming.

[Illustration: To make Belt]

  8. If desired, cut a pocket by the pattern of the pinafore-pocket.
  (See Insert II.)

  Sew in place on left side of rompers in position shown by dotted
  lines on pattern.

  9. TO MAKE BELT.―Clip a tiny gash between the two points at each
  end of belt. Turn in outer edges of belt one-quarter inch.

  Fold belt in half _lengthwise_. Stitch or overhand the edges.
  Make button-hole in one end. Sew button on the other end.

  _Sew belt in place_ in middle of back of rompers―as shown on
  pattern. Sew to the button-hole side of rompers.


PATTERN 15.―DOLL’S BLOOMERS

See Insert III

  1. Cut by pattern of rompers,―_making only as long as the line
  marked_ BLOOMERS.

  2. Make in same way as rompers.

  3. Make a half-inch hem in the top. Run elastic in the hem and
  fasten off in same way as ends of legs of rompers.

[Illustration: Tack strap under]

[Illustration:

  22. Automobile Bonnet
  24. Muff
  24. Tippet
  28. Polo Cap]


[Illustration: INSERT 8

PATTERNS 22·24·28·

  22. AUTOMOBILE BONNET
  24. MUFF & TIPPET
  28. POLO CAP]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.


PATTERN 16.―DOLL’S LEGGINGS

See Insert IX

  NOTE.―Make leggings of old kid gloves.

  1. Cut two of each piece of pattern No. 16.

  Pin three pieces _not alike_ together.

  2. Baste the three pieces not alike, together, matching two
  single notches, and two double notches, _making top and bottom of
  legging even_.

  3. Stitch in a plain seam.

  Sew little “shank” buttons on one side, and cut button-holes in
  the other side, as indicated on pattern.

  Do not attempt to work button-holes in kid.

  4. Turn strap under and “tack” (sew with several stitches over
  and over each other) in place on wrong side of opposite piece, as
  indicated in pattern.

  NOTE.―Always _baste with right sides facing each other_, in
  making the leggings.

  _Yours for happy stitches,
  His Nibs,
  King of Fairy Thimble Land._

The little girl made everything the King sent.

[Illustration: The little girl made everything the King sent]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXVI]

CHAPTER XXVI

A FUR-LINED CAPE FOR PARTIES


[Illustration: “Our livings of course”]

“I CAN’T wait! I simply cawn’t!” Mary Frances paused at the door. It
was Scissors Shears again.

“Pray, why ‛cawn’t’ you?” mimicked Tommy Pin Cushion.

“Ah, don’t you know? To-day’s lesson is so ‛el-e-gan-tis-si-mus!’”

“What do we make―I mean what do we help make?” asked Tommy Pin
Cushion.

“Our livings, of course,” clicked Scissors Shears.

“Oh, you simple, silly old sharp-tongued―!”

“There, there, that will do!” said Scissors Shears; “ask Sewing Bird.”

“What do we make, Sewing Bird, please?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion. “I
didn’t hear.”

[Illustration: “What do we make”]

   “A pretty thing
      Of funny shape―
   A dainty, party
     Fur-lined cape,”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “Use Jubey!”]

“Oh, ho! Hee-hee!” laughed Scissors Shears. “I bet we’ll have to use
Jubey.”

“What for?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion.

“For the fur,” said Scissors Shears.

“I guess not, I guess not,” said Mary Frances stepping into the room.
“Use Jubey! I’d rather Mary Marie would never have a fur-lined cape,
Magic and Mystery!”

“Of course,” said Fairy Lady. “Oh, of course! By the way,―where is
that cat?”

“She’s down-stairs,” said Mary Frances, “hunting mice in the cellar.
Grandma asked me to let her be there.”

“That’s all right,” said Fairy Lady, “I feel a little more
comfortable to know she is more interested in mice than in birds, at
present. You see, she seems to birds very much as lions do to people.”

[Illustration: “Hunting mice in the cellar”]

[Illustration: To make ‛near-ermine’]

“I’ll take good care that she doesn’t come ups-tairs again, dear
Fairy Lady,” said Mary Frances. “But do I really need fur for
to-day’s lesson?”

“Have you any fur in Mary Marie’s trunk?” asked Fairy Lady.

“No,” said Mary Frances. “That is one thing that isn’t here.”

“What is that?” asked Fairy Lady, peering into the trunk. “Is it very
thick white outing flannel?”

“Yes,” said Mary Frances, holding up the soft, fleecy material.

“Good!” laughed Fairy Lady. “Good! Now, fetch a bottle of ink and a
big toothpick.”

[Illustration: Bottle of ink and big toothpick]

“What in the world?” thought the little girl.

“I will show you how to make ‛near-ermine’ fur,” said Fairy Lady,
dipping the broad end of the large toothpick into the ink, and making
black tail-like marks on the flannelette.

“Oh, how sweet!” exclaimed Mary Frances.

“Isn’t it pretty?” said Fairy Lady. “This is for the lining. What
will the outside of the cape be?”

“Here is some heavy blue silk,” said Mary Frances.

“Lovely!” exclaimed Fairy Lady. “You can cut out the cape, then pin
it to the flannelette, and cut out the lining. Then unpin it, and
mark the lining like this, to imitate ermine;―and here is another
parcel from the Thimble King.”

Mary Frances opened the package and read aloud:


PATTERN 17.―DOLL’S FUR-LINED CAPE

See Insert V

  To cut out―

  1. Pin pattern with the Straight Edge of FRONT on a lengthwise
  edge of material. Cut out, carefully making all notches.

  2. Cut another piece exactly like this.

  3. Cut lining in exactly the same way.

  4. Cut collar with the two ring (oo) edge of pattern on a
  lengthwise fold of material.

  5. Cut collar lining in same way.

[Illustration: Baste along edges]

  To make―

  NOTE.―Make the outside of the cape first. The lining is made in
  exactly the same way.

  1. TO MAKE CAPE.―Pin the two pieces together with the right
  sides facing each other.

  2. Baste the long seam (having three single notches).

  Open the cape.

  3. Baste the shoulder seams, matching the notches carefully.

  4. Try on doll. Alter cape, if necessary. Stitch seams.

  5. Make the lining in the same way.

[Illustration: Mary Frances opened the package]

  Press open all seams.

  6. Turn in outside edges of cape and lining one-quarter inch,
  except at the neck. Baste. Press.

  7. Pin lining in cape, wrong sides facing, carefully fitting seam
  to seam. Overhand or stitch outside turned-in edges.

  8. Baste collar and collar-lining together. Stitch an
  eighth-of-an-inch seam along all edges except the neck-edge.

  Turn inside-out. Baste along edges. Press.

  9. Sew the collar to the cape, in same way as an apron band,
  first pinning the double notches in the outside of the collar to
  the double notches in the outside of the cape.

  10. Fasten cape with a hook and eye.

“My, I do hope such finery won’t make Mary Marie vain!” said Fairy
Lady.

“No,” said Mary Frances, “I think it won’t. I’ve explained to her
that she must divide with all her sisters-in-law, and step-sisters,
her whole outfit. It seems almost like a trousseau.”

“That’s true and sew!” exclaimed Scissors Shears.

[Illustration: My, I do hope such finery won’t make Mary Marie vain”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXVII ]

CHAPTER XXVII

A “DRESS-UP” DRESS


“GOOD-AFTERNOON, your Seamstress-ship,” welcomed Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “Good-afternoon”]

“Good-afternoon, dear Thimble People,” said Mary Frances. “I was so
sorry that I had to miss last week’s lesson! Grandma didn’t take her
afternoon out, and little Lottie was over here to play.”

“I know,” said Scissors Shears. “I heard you; I had on my long ears.”

“You did!” laughed Mary Frances. “Well, did you hear me promise to
give her some little helps in dressing her doll? I would dearly love
to make something for her doll―a dress, I think. She is just the
size of Mary Marie.”

“What’s her name?” asked Scissors Shears.

“The doll’s name, do you mean? Katy-did.”

[Illustration: “Good-afternoon, your Seamstress-ship”]

   “Oh, bless my bill!
      Oh, what a name!
   If Katy-did―
     It is a shame,”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “Katie-did what?”]

“Katy did what?” asked Scissors Shears, staring at Mary Frances.

“Katy-did Nice,” answered Mary Frances.

“You mean nicely, I think,” said Scissors Shears.

“No,” said Mary Frances. “Nice is Lottie’s last name. The whole name
of Lottie’s doll is―Katy-did Nice. Can’t I make her a dress?”

“Well,” answered Sewing Bird, slowly, “if you do, you may be asked
about us; and if you answer the question truly, we’ll never, never be
able to do anything more.”

“Never! Never!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I’d rather never make the
dress for Katy-did Nice.”

   “If you wait
      And do not fret,
    You’ll get your wishes
      Even yet,”

sang Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “Katie-did Nice”]

“Oh, thank you, dear Magic and Mystery,” said the little girl. “I
will be patient,―indeed I will!”

“Well, then,” said Fairy Lady, “here is to-day’s message, and gift
from the King of Thimble Land.”

Mary Frances took the package. It was tied with golden thread and
fastened with a sunbeam.

“Press the sunbeam,” smiled Fairy Lady, “and the package will open.”

Out fell


PATTERN 18.―DOLL’S AFTERNOON DRESS

See Insert VI

[Illustration: First tuck]

  To Tuck Dress―

  1. Cut the material twenty-four inches long, and eighteen inches
  wide.

  2. Find center by folding the goods crosswise. Crease.

  3. Spread material open. Measure five and one-half inches down on
  both sides of the crease.

  Mark across the goods with pins―then with red bastings.

  4. Fold material lengthwise. Crease well, between red bastings.

  Spread the material open. Run a blue basting thread down this
  center crease.

  5. Measure three-quarter inch from the blue basting to the right,
  _along the red bastings_. Mark with pins.

[Illustration: Mark tucks each side center basting]

  6. Fold and crease from pin to pin, being careful to keep a straight
  line.

  7. Baste three-eighth of an inch from edge of fold, through the
  double cloth.

  8. Do same to left of center crease.

  9. To make another tuck―Lay tuck already made, backward toward
  center.

  Then measure from edge of fold of tuck one and one-half inches, along
  each red basting line. Mark with pins.

[Illustration: Cut four collar pieces]

  10. Make new tuck in same way as first tuck.

  There should be two tucks each side of center crease.

  11. Stitch tucks along the basting lines.

  NOTE.―When tucking is finished, compare it with the pinholes on
  pattern.

  ALL THESE TUCKS are laid and creased to the bottom of goods
  before cutting out dress.

  To Cut Out Dress―

  1. Fold goods crosswise. Pin pattern in place, with edge having
  double rings on the fold. Cut out.

  2. With a pin, prick through the dotted belt lines.

  3. Cut four collar pieces. Pin arrow (➸) edge of collar pattern
  on a lengthwise edge of goods.

  4. Cut two belts, with double rings on a lengthwise fold of
  material.

  5. Cut two sleeve-bands by sleeve-band pattern of Morning Dress
  (Pattern 9).

[Illustration: Two tucks each side center]

  6. To Cut Skirt Trimming Band.―Remove pattern from dress.
  Spread open the skirt part. Lay it upon the plain trimming
  material. Pin in place.

  7. Cut off at edge of skirt. Make this band one and one-half inches
  wide. Cut two such bands.

  To Make Dress―

  1. Join seams of skirt trimming-band.

  2. Stitch sleeve-bands in place, as for Morning Dress.

  3. Make placket and make button-holes, and sew on buttons.

  4. Join underarm with French seams.

  5. Face (right side of) bottom of dress with skirt trimming-band in
  the following way:

  “Facing” is making a false hem.

  On the wrong side of the skirt, lay the skirt trimming-band with the
  lower edge even with the bottom of the skirt.

  Baste. Stitch one-quarter inch from edge.

[Illustration: Sew belt fast through a button]

  6. Remove bastings. Turn band over to right side.

  Crease along the seam. Baste along the seam.

  Turn in edge of trimming-band (or facing) one-quarter inch.

  Baste band flat against dress. Stitch (or hem) in place.

  7. Make each belt in same way as belt for rompers.

  8. Make two collars in same way as collar for fur-lined cape.
  Pattern 17.

  9. Sew collars fast to dress, first pinning notch to the
  fold-crease of the shoulder at the neck.

  Attach collars to dress in same way as underwaist to flannel
  petticoat.

[Illustration: Lay edge of skirt on trimming band]

  10. Pin belts in place shown on pattern. Fasten each belt
  in two places only. On the point, which lies over a plait, sew
  belt fast, through a button.

  These belts hold the fullness of the dress, under arms, in place.

  _Best wishes to the little girl who “tries.”_

  _King Thimble._

[Illustration: “Can you get along without our help?”]

“How beautiful!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Please thank His Majesty,
dear Thimble People.”

“Can you get along without our help, please?” asked Scissors Shears.

“Well,” said Mary Frances, “the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try, you
know,―”

“But,” said Scissors Shears, hopping up and down, “what I want to
know is,―can you cut all that without help? May I ask what goods you
will use for the afternoon dress?”

“This pretty red-dotted lawn,” said Mary Frances, “and this fine
white lawn for the guimpe!”

“Will you, may I ask, please,―will you leave the lawn and pattern on
the sewing table?”

“Oh, I know!” cried Mary Frances. “You want to help by cutting them
out, Scissors Shears―but I will do my own _making_,―thank you.”

[Illustration: “How beautiful!”]

When the afternoon dress was finished, Mary Frances slipped it on
Mary Marie, sat her in her rocking chair, then stepped outside, and
peeped in to see what the Thimble People would do. In a minute, they
gathered in a circle around the pretty doll, and began singing:

   “Proudie! Proudie!
    Aren’t you a little Proudie!
    Proudie! Proudie!
    Aren’t you a little Proudie!”

Mary Marie looked pleased, but couldn’t say a word.

[Illustration: Proudie! Proudie!
        Aren’t you a little Proudie!”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXVIII]

CHAPTER XXVIII

MARY MARIE HAS A PARTY DRESS


“DEARIE me! Thimble People,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I’m so excited!
I’m so excited! Mary Marie has been invited to a party.”

[Illustration: “Dearie me! Thimble People!”]

“To a party!” exclaimed Scissors Shears. “To a party,―excuse me, but
don’t you mean, ‛by a party?’”

“How could you buy a party?” asked Tommy Pin Cushion.

“It’s been known to be done,” answered Scissors Shears.

“Will her mother let her go?” asked Silver Thimble anxiously.

“Yes, indeed,” laughed Mary Frances. “If she has a party dress―”

   “What a guess!
      Why, what a guess!
    Next lesson is
      A party dress!”

[Illustration: “Will her Mother let her go?”]

sang Sewing Bird, hopping on one leg on the table, and fluttering her
wings,

   “Mary Marie,
    How sweet she’ll be
    In finery:
    Not spoiled she’ll be
    By vanity,
    Or finery.”

[Illustration: Fluttering her wings]

“Just be her own sweet self, won’t you, dear?” said Mary Frances,
hugging the dolly close.

   “If you were
      As pretty as she,
    You might be
      Spoiled by finery,”

sang Tommy Pin Cushion, pointing to Scissors Shears. “By the way,
how’s business?”

“Dull! Fatty,” began Scissors Shears, “You―” then, seeing Mary
Frances’ look, he added lamely, “Pretty is as pretty does, and beauty
is only skin-deep. If you lost your skin, Tommy, we’d knock all the
stuffin’s out o’ you!”

[Illustration: “Just be her own sweet self”]

[Illustration: “Hush!” whispered Sewing Bird]

“Hush!” whispered Sewing Bird,

   “Now, let’s to work,
    Now, let’s not shirk,
      But sew with purpose hearty!
    With love and fun,
    Work is begun
      On the dress for dolly’s party!”

“Oh, thank you,” exclaimed Mary Frances, opening Mary Marie’s trunk.
“What shall we use, Magic and Mystery?”

“Let me see?” said Fairy Lady, flying down beside the trunk.

Mary Frances was too surprised to say anything when she saw the
lovely gauzy wings spread out, and Fairy Lady sailing down from the
table.

“Oh,” said the little fairy in her bird-like voice, “little Lady
Seamstress, this is only a small surprise compared to the lovely ones
in store for you.”

“More yet, dear Fairy Lady?” asked Mary Frances, her eyes opening in
wonder. “Why, it seems to me―”

[Illustration: Fairy Lady sailing down from the table]

[Illustration: Let me see. said Fairy Lady]

“I must not tell you another word,” said the little lady; “I
shouldn’t have said even that!”

[Illustration: “What is it?”]

“Oh, I wouldn’t have dared whisper that,” said Tommy Pin Cushion to
Emery Bag. “Why, the King would have shaken the stuffing out of me!”

“This,” exclaimed Fairy Lady, “is just the thing to make a party
dress for Mary Marie,” and she held up a piece of most beautiful
fabric.

“What is it?” asked Mary Frances. “I didn’t see that in the trunk!”

“Didn’t you?” asked Fairy Lady.

Mary Frances held up the sparkling goods. It was very, very fine, and
thin, yet not veil-like. It shone like spun glass, and was made of
the colors of the rainbow.

“How exquisite!” breathed the little girl. “Isn’t it beautiful!
Please, dear Fairy Lady, where did it come from?”

“It came,” said Fairy Lady, “from your friend, the King of Fairy
Thimble Land.”

“Oh,” said Mary Frances. “Did you, dear Fairy Lady, did you bring it?”

[Illustration: “I wouldn’t have dared whisper that!”]

[Illustration: She held up a little satchel]

“In this,” nodded Fairy Lady, and she held up a little satchel that
looked like Mary Frances’ mother’s pearl earring.

“Will it go in such a tiny satchel?” asked the little girl, in an
awed voice.

“Yes,” smiled Fairy Lady, “but the pattern takes up more room.”

“Did you carry that, too?” asked Mary Frances.

“Yes, in a little suit case,” said Fairy Lady.

“May I see the pattern?” asked Mary Frances.

She wondered how Fairy Lady would get back on the table, but the
little lady spread her wings again―this time showing the lovely
coloring and golden tips.

Flying high above the table, she came down and settled herself in the
doll’s rocking chair.

Then she spread open


PATTERN 19.―DOLL’S GUIMPE (FOR PARTY DRESS)

See Insert III

  Suggestions for material.―Dimity or lace.

  To cut out―

  1. Pin pattern with edge having two rings (oo) on a _crosswise_
  fold of goods. Cut out.

[Illustration: “Yes, in a little suit case”]

  2. Cut guimpe sleeve-band, with arrow lengthwise of material.

  To make―

  1. Gather end of each sleeve.

  2. Fold sleeve-band through center, lengthwise. (See dotted line on
  pattern.)

[Illustration: Sew sleeve-band in place]

  3. Sew sleeve-bands in place at ends of sleeves, in same way as
  band of little “tie around apron.”

  4. Join guimpe under arms with French seams.

  5. Make a half-inch hem down each side of back.

  6. Make a half-inch hem in bottom of guimpe. Through this hem run
  a narrow tape, threaded into a bodkin.

  7. Turn the _narrowest hem possible_ in the neck. Do not attempt
  to hem this with hemming stitches, but overhand it closely.

  8. Overhand narrow lace edging in the neck and sleeves.

  9. Make three button-holes, and sew on buttons.


PATTERN 20.―DOLL’S PARTY DRESS

See Insert X

  Suggestions for material.―Flowered dimity or lawn.

  To cut out―

  1. The skirt should be cut: five and one-half inches long―with
  the _lengthwise_ of the material.

  Thirty-two inches wide―_across_ the material.

  2. To Cut Out the Waist―

  Fold material crosswise. Pin pattern with edge having two rings
  (oo) on the fold. Cut out. Remove pattern.

[Illustration: Through hem run a narrow tape]

  3. To Cut Neck.―Cut pattern along the row of pinholes, marked FRONT.

[Illustration: Gather across the shoulder]

  Fold back along other row of pinholes.

  Spread waist _open_ on table.

  Pin pattern in place on one end of waist. Cut neck by the turned-in
  V-shaped outline.

  To make―

  1. Join skirt and make placket as in white lawn petticoat.

  2. Make a three-quarter inch hem at the bottom.

  Gather top, using two gathering threads. Begin each thread in center
  top of skirt.

  3. Fold waist _lengthwise_. Cut open the back _from center of square_
  of neck. Make half-inch hems down the backs.

  4. Make a _narrow_ hem around the neck-opening.

  5. Spread waist open on table. Cut a piece of baby ribbon two and
  one-quarter inches long. Cut another piece one and one-half inches
  long.

  6. Fasten, by sewing through a bead, one end of each piece of
  ribbon to one side of the V-shaped neck opening, in the place
  shown by the pinholes in the pattern.

  7. Fasten other end in same way, making the front neck opening
  one and one-quarter inches wide at the top, and three-quarters of
  an inch wide at the pointed end.

  8. Join with French seam _from notches_ to _bottom_ of waist.

  9. Hem armholes above the seams.

  Gather across the shoulder fold, making the gathered goods
  measure _one inch across_. Fasten thread.

[Illustration: Fasten ribbon by sewing through a bead]

  10. Cut a belt of half-inch-wide white tape, making it eleven inches
  long.

  Gather bottom of waist. Turn in ends of tape belt one-quarter inch.

  11. Baste gathers of waist flat to tape belt, having tape on wrong
  side. Baste gathers of skirt flat to other edge of tape belt.

  Stitch in place. Sew lace insertion, or ribbon beading over the
  gathers on the right side.

  12. Make button-holes, and sew on buttons.

  13. Trim the hems around the neck-opening and armholes with


  38.―FRENCH KNOTS

[Illustration: French Knots]

  1. Thread embroidery needle with embroidery cotton. Make knot.
  Draw needle through from wrong side.

  2. With left hand, wrap cotton, _where it comes through the
  material_, three times around the needle, holding needle with
  right hand.

  3. Holding the coiled thread firmly in place with left thumb,
  insert needle-point downward, at place where it first came
  through. Pull through to wrong side.

  4. Push needle upward where next stitch is to be made. Pull
  through to right side. Proceed as above.

“Won’t it be charming?” said Mary Frances. “Oh, won’t Mary Marie be
the happiest doll!”

[Illustration: Trim with french knots]

“But how can you keep it a secret, if she goes to a party?” asked
Scissors Shears anxiously. “I don’t want to be a Never-Never.”

“Oh,” said Mary Frances, “the party isn’t to be given until next
summer. She’s only invited―that’s all.”

[Illustration: “Strike me pink!”]

“Strike me pink!” exclaimed Tommy Pin Cushion. “I was feeling scared
white.”

“Shows how silly it is to worry,” said Emery Bag.

“I beg all your pardons,” said Mary Frances. “I didn’t mean to be―to
take advantage. I almost forgot how long it is till next summer. I am
very sorry if I did wrong.”

“Gives you longer to finish the dress,” said Fairy Lady. “There’s a
good deal of work on it.”

“I’ll work very hard,” said Mary Frances, “and I’ll be more careful
what I say in the future.”

   “We understand, of course we do,
    That your kind heart is always true;
    You wouldn’t do a thing that you
    Would not have others do to you,”

[Illustration: Sang Sewing Bird]

sang Sewing Bird,―and perhaps, the little bird smiled.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is how the dress looked when Mary Frances had finished it.

[Illustration: Mary Marie is going to a party”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXIX]

CHAPTER XXIX

MARY MARIE GOES AUTOMOBILING


“OH, my feathers and oh, my eye!” Sewing Bird was screaming, as Mary
Frances came to the sewing room door for the next lesson.

[Illustration: “Oh, my feathers and oh, my eye!”]

“Why, what’s the matter, Sewing Bird?” asked Mary Frances.

   “Not for myself, but quite contrary―
    ’Twas for the sake of Dick Canary!”

sang Sewing Bird frantically.

“Why, what is the matter, dear little bird?” again asked Mary Frances.

Sewing Bird replied:

   “While I was sitting here in state,
    Just what happened I’ll now relate:

   “A gentle scratching at the door,
    A gentle foot-step on the floor,
    Then Jubey, black as a blackberry,
    Looked up at pretty Dick Canary,
    And what he said, to me seemed clear:―
    ‛Ah, bird, your voice is very dear!
    Your feathers shine like purest gold
    As in the sun they do unfold;
    Oh, sing to me, you lovely thing,
    Oh, sing and sing and sing and sing!’

[Illustration: “Why, what’s the matter?”]

[Illustration: “Dick Canary hurt his throat”]

   “Then Dick Canary hurt his throat,
    He sang so loud on every note.

   “‛Now, people love to eat of chicken―
    If I stole one, I’d get a lickin’,
    And then you’d hear an awful scream―
    “Why don’t you give that cat ice-cream?”
    A chicken and a bird to me
    Seem much alike―do they to thee?
    How classic is your pretty voice,
    I love to hear you make that noise.
    Oh, sing to me, you lovely thing,
    Oh, sing and sing and sing and sing.’

[Illustration: “Ah, bird, your voice is very dear!”]

[Illustration: “He sang so loud on every note”]

   “Then Dick Canary hurt his throat,
    He sang so loud on every note.

   “‘Music has charm to soothe, I believe,
    The wild instincts that in me breathe.
    How horrible your lonely fate,
    To be behind that golden gate.
    If I for you undo the bars,
    Perhaps you’ll soar beyond the stars.
    Where go birds-souls―I really wonder―
    It makes me sit and sit and ponder.
    Oh, sing to me, you lovely thing,
    Oh, sing and sing and sing and sing.’

   “Then Dick Canary hurt his throat,
    He sang so loud on every note.

   “‛If I undo the bars for thee,
    And from the cage thy sweet life free―
    Well, folks love chicken, this I know―
    Are you a chicken? Yes! I trow!’

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: “I heard you on the stair”]

   “Just then, I heard you on the stair,
    Dear Miss, and cried out, then and there;
   Not for myself―but quite contrary―
   ’Twas for the sake of Dick Canary.”

[Illustration: “Dick Canary seemed to like it”]

“I met Jubey scudding into the kitchen,” laughed Mary Frances,
“frightened to death,―she looked. I can’t understand how she got
up-stairs, Magic and Mystery. I said to her: ‛Jubey, you’ll get no
sympathy from me if you’ve been up-stairs.’”

“The strange part is,” said Fairy Lady, “that Dick Canary seemed to
like it.”

   “‛Flattery sounds
      Sweet to the ear,
    Even from those
      We ought to fear,’

my Grandma says,” replied Mary Frances.

“Oh, yes,” said Fairy Lady. “I do believe that is so; now, for
to-day’s plans.”

“This time,” said Mary Frances, rather shame-facedly, “it is a real
event. Mary Marie has been invited to take an automobile ride with
Lottie’s ten children.”

[Illustration: “This time it is a real event”]

“Oh, how delightful!” exclaimed Fairy Lady, “and so opportune!”

“Opportune,” thought Mary Frances. “Opportune―that must mean ‛just
right.’”

“Yes,” nodded Fairy Lady, as though reading her thoughts, “it is
‛just right’―for I have to-day the


PATTERN 21.―DOLL’S AUTOMOBILE COAT

See Insert VII

[Illustration: “So opportune!”]

  To cut out―

  1. Fold goods crosswise. Pin pattern with edge having two rings
  (oo) on fold. Cut out.

  2. Remove pattern. Spread coat open on a table.

  3. Cut pattern along the _one_ row of pinholes marked FRONT. (See
  Directions on Insert VII.) Fold pattern backward along the other
  row of pinholes.

  4. Pin pattern in place on _one_ end of coat.

  5. Cut neck along the V-shaped lines.

  Remove pattern.

  6. Cut goods open from point of V-shaped neck, to bottom of coat.

  This makes the front-opening.

  7. Cut two collars with edge of pattern having the two rings (oo)
  on lengthwise fold of material.

  8. Cut two cuffs with edge of pattern having two rings (oo) on
  lengthwise fold of material.

[Illustration: “That must mean ‛just right’”]

  To make―

  1. To face the front-openings:―

  Spread coat open upon a piece of the material of which it is made,
  right sides facing.

  2. Baste along front-opening, and _around_ the neck, through the
  material underneath.

  Cut open the underneath-material, along the opening of the coat.

  3. Cut underneath-material off, one and one-half inches from edge of
  front-opening and _around_ the neck.

  4. Stitch facing in place one-quarter inch from edges. Remove
  bastings. Turn facings over to wrong side. Baste edge, along enclosed
  seam.

  5. Closely notch, or “pink” the “raw” edges of facings.

[Illustration: To fasten coat]

  Baste facings down along notched edges. Press.

  Stitch (or “tack”) facings down near the notched edges.

  6. Baste facings on ends of sleeves, on wrong side of coat.

  Stitch one-quarter inch from edge. Remove bastings.

  7. Turn facings over to right side, and baste along the turned
  edges. Turn down one-quarter inch at top, and stitch down.

  8. Join coat under arms with French seams.

  9. Make collar as for Fur-lined Cape.

  10. Matching notches carefully, baste collar on coat, and sew in
  place as in making Fur-lined Cape.

  11. Make a three-quarter inch hem at bottom of coat.

  12. Fasten coat with two large buttons and button-holes.

[Illustration: Closely notch edges of facings]


PATTERN 22.―DOLL’S AUTOMOBILE BONNET

See Insert VIII

  To cut―

  1. Fold goods lengthwise.

  Pin pattern with edge having two rings (oo) on the fold. Clip the
  notch carefully.

  2. In cutting Bonnet Band and lining:―Pin pattern with edge
  having two rings (oo) on a lengthwise fold of material.

[Illustration: Attach ribbon strings]

  To make―

  1. One-quarter inch from edge, gather circular part of bonnet
  from notch in center back to notch in center front. Gather other
  side of circle.

  2. Baste lining to Bonnet Band.

  Stitch one-quarter inch from front edge.

  3. Remove bastings. Open the band. Join ends in a plain seam.
  Fold lining down inside band, and baste along the circular seam.
  Stitch one-quarter inch from edge.

  4. To Join Band to Bonnet:―Proceed just as in attaching collar
  to Fur-lined Cape.

  First pin single center-front notch of bonnet and of band
  together.

  Then the double notches.

  Then single center-back notch of bonnet to _seam_ of band.

  Baste and sew in place, hemming down the lining.

  Attach ribbon-strings at the double notches.

[Illustration: Gather from notch to notch]

[Illustration: “This dear little coat”]

  NOTE.―Trim bonnet with bunch of ribbon-rosette flowers, sewed on
  left side.

  Fold back the bonnet band through the middle. (See dotted line on
  pattern.)

“My dear Thimble People!” exclaimed Mary Frances, after working a
long while with the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try. “Never did a child
have such lovely friends―never! Look at this dear little coat!”

“We love all children who are patient, and try to do their best!”
smiled Fairy Lady. “So many are forgetful, or impolite and impatient.”

“I’m afraid I’m sometimes all of those,” said Mary Frances.

  “But in your very down-deep heart,
    You never think the things that smart;
    Your heart is really always kind―
    Sometimes you’re wrong, and sometimes blind,―
    But those who know you well, know this:
    To make all right, you give a kiss―
    Not just an ordinary kiss―
    It says, ‛Please just forgive me this!’”

[Illustration: Trim bonnet with ribbon-rosette flowers]

“And that is why you are loved so much!” Sewing Bird sang.

Mary Frances took Mary Marie, all dressed in her new automobile
clothes, out to the automobile which had just pulled up in front of
the door. And Scissors Shears, and Tommy Pin Cushion, and Emery Bag,
and Pen Cil, and Needle Book, and all the other Thimble People, waved
their cunning little hands.

[Illustration: Mary Frances took Mary Marie out to the automobile]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXX]

CHAPTER XXX

MARY MARIE GOES IN BATHING


[Illustration: “S’sh! s’sh!”]

MARY FRANCES tip-toed into the sewing room.

“S’sh! s’sh!” she said. “Oh, Thimble People, I’ve,―oh, dear me! Oh,
Magic and Mystery,―I’ve got the bath-tub half full of water. It’s
the ocean, I have my sail-boat on it, and Mary Marie is going in
bathing―when I’ve finished my lesson. I just dipped her feet in to
see how she’d like it―I can’t exactly say Grandma would approve―but
Mother would let me, I think.”

“Isn’t it strange? My grandmother―my mother’s mother―doesn’t think
exactly as _her_ little girl, my mother, does. Now, I generally
always think almost exactly what my mother thinks is right.”

“‛Generally always almost exactly,’” whispered Scissors Shears to
Tommy Pin Cushion. “That’s the way I agree with Sewing Bird.”

“And you, Tommy Pin Cushion?” asked Emery Bag.

[Illustration: “And you, Tommy Pin Cushion?”]

“And I―” began Tommy Pin Cushion.

“Hush up!” said Scissors Shears. “You’re always stuck in! You keep
quiet, nobody gets a chance to talk for you!”

Tommy Pin Cushion got very red in the face.

“It―seems―to―me,―” he stammered.

“Yes, there you go again!” exclaimed Scissors Shears. “Just as I
said! Always forever trying to stick your bill in―though I must
say―you haven’t much of a bill―I must say that!”

“Stop quarreling!” exclaimed Mary Frances.

“If Mary Marie goes in bathing,” said Fairy Lady, “here is just the
thing she’ll need:”


PATTERN 23.―DOLL’S BATHING SUIT

[Illustration: Doll’s Bathing Suit]

  1. The Bathing Suit is made by the pattern of Rompers (see Insert
  IV) and of

  2. Doll’s Lawn Petticoat. (See Pattern 12.)

  Cut skirt only five inches long, and do not make a tuck.

  Suggestions for Material―

  Red or blue flannel, trimmed with white braid.

  NOTE.―The skirt may be gathered or plaited.

  Make the opening of the rompers in front. Face the front openings
  with a strip of lining material one-half inch wide.

[Illustration: Tommy Pin Cushion got red in the face]

[Illustration:

  16. Leggings
  25. Sun Bonnet]


[Illustration: INSERT 9

PATTERNS 16·25·

  16. LEGGINGS
  25. SUN BONNET]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.

[Illustration: “This is splendid”]

  Make eyelets in the facings, and lace Bathing Suit together
  through the eyelets.

“This is splendid!” exclaimed Mary Frances, as she began to cut out
the suit. “Grandma is to be away several hours to-day. I would miss
her terribly if it were not for you, dear friends. We have such
fun―she and I―almost as much as Father and I, or Mother and I, or
Bill and I―or, just as much as Lottie and I! But I want to get these
lovely things made for my dear Mary Marie before Grandma comes back.”

“Then,” smiled Fairy Lady, “you must learn to make:”


39.―EYELETS

  For practice, use a folded and basted piece of muslin, as for
  button-holes.

  1. Pierce the cloth with a “stiletto,” or very large
  needle-punch, breaking as few threads as possible.

  2. Work the edges of the hole with over-and-over overhanding
  stitches, close together as possible. Hold work over forefinger
  of left hand.

  NOTE.―In making a large eye-hole, mark a circle with running
  stitch, cut out close inside the thread. Turn back the edges and
  work closely with button-hole stitch.

[Illustration: Eyelets]

“Oh,” exclaimed Mary Frances. “Now, when I finish this, my Mary Marie
can splash and splash―but I’ll not get them done to-day,―even with
the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try!”

[Illustration: “Far better than We think or see”]

“But you will finish them quite soon,” said Fairy Lady, “I feel
certain.”

“You do believe in me, dear little Lady,” said Mary Frances.

   “Faith in us
      Makes us do, and be,
    Far better than
      We think or see,”

sang Sewing Bird.

“If she doesn’t get them done soon, Mary Marie will lose her bath,”
whispered Tommy Pin Cushion, giggling, and he began to recite,―

  “Oh, Missy, may I go in to swim?
     Oh, yes, my darling rub-dub;
   Hang your clothes on a towel-rack limb,
     But don’t go near the bath-tub.”

[Illustration: Whispered Tommy Pin Cushion]

“Tommy Pin Cushion!” exclaimed Mary Frances, picking him up and
putting him on the window sill.

“Excuse me!” spoke up the little fellow, looking out of the window,
“but here comes your grandmother.”

“I better run and let the water out of the bath-tub,” said Mary
Frances.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Mary Marie didn’t get her bath!” exclaimed Scissors Shears. “She
didn’t get her bath!”

“Well, she went in bathing, anyhow,” said Tommy Pin Cushion. “Didn’t
you see? Both her feet were wet!”

“That’s how wet you’d get if you went swimming,” said Scissors
Shears. “She’ll go in bathing when the little Miss finishes her
suit―maybe.”

[Illustration: “Mary Marie is going in bathing!”]




CHAPTER XXXI

MUFFS AND CAPS AND PRETTIEST TRAPS


[Illustration: “It means ‛au revoir,’ but not good-bye”]

“THIS letter says,” explained Mary Frances, “this letter says, oh,
Thimble Friends, that my mother and father are coming home in two
weeks,―and Billy, too. I must hurry to finish my lessons. Oh,
dear, dear! Why, what’s the matter, Scissors Shears―and Tommy Pin
Cushion―and Emery Bag?”

“It means good-bye!” sobbed Scissors Shears.

“It means good-bye!” sobbed Tommy Pin Cushion.

“It means good-bye!” whimpered Emery Bag.

“It means ‛au revoir,’ but not good-bye,” sang Sewing Bird.

“Oh, it do, do it?” said Scissors Shears, looking sharply at Sewing
Bird.

“Does it, Magic and Mystery?” asked Mary Frances.

“It doesn’t mean good-bye,” answered Fairy Lady. “But I can’t explain
it until some time later.”

[Illustration: “It means good-bye!”]

“My, I’m relieved!” said Mary Frances. “So―what is to-day’s lesson,
dear Fairy Lady?”

[Illustration: A Muff and Tippet]

   “For Mary Marie more lovely things
    The Fairy Lady to you brings,―
    A little muff, and tippet of fur,
    A sweet little summer cap for her,
    A dainty little cross-stitch bag―
    But I must stop for fear I’ll brag,”

sang Fairy Lady. Then stooping, she drew these patterns from under
the rocking chair cushion:


PATTERN 24.―DOLL’S MUFF AND TIPPET

See Insert VIII

  Directions for making Doll’s Fur Muff and Tippet.

  1. Cut tippet from heavy flannelette―arrow on lengthwise of
  goods.

  2. Mark with ink to imitate Ermine. Turn in edge one-quarter of
  an inch. Baste.

  3. Cut lining of silk.

  4. From sheet-cotton cut a lining one-half of an inch smaller
  than pattern edges.

[Illustration: Mark with ink]

  5. Baste lining to this. Turn edges of lining over this, and
  baste.

  Sew on hook and eye, at the neck.

  6. Baste linings to outside, and “slip stitch” together.


40.―SLIP STITCH


[Illustration: To Bind a Seam]

  Is like hemming stitch, but the needle is slipped along about
  one-half of an inch―for each stitch. The needle is put into the
  material directly below where your thread is last brought out.

  7. Cut and make muff in same way as tippet. Then, join the ends
  of the outside in a plain seam. Open the seam, and hem down the
  lining seam. Turn muff to right side.

  Run through the muff a white cord.


PATTERN 25.―DOLL’S SUN BONNET

See Insert IX

  Cut out and make in same way as Automobile Bonnet.

  Suggestions for material―Figured organdy, with lawn brim; or,
  brim of white pique.

  If pique is used for brim do not make brim double, but
  blanket-stitch the outer edge, and bind the seam where attached
  to bonnet.

  To Bind a Seam.―Cut a narrow bias strip of goods. Baste it even
  with the seam on the wrong side. Stitch in place. Turn it over
  the seam. Turn in the raw edge. Baste. Hem down. This may be done
  with tape, which will not need edges turned in.

[Illustration: Slip stitch]


PATTERN 26.―DOLL’S WORK BAG

[Illustration: “I’ll excuse you for interrupting”]

  Use checked silk-gingham.

  Cut same as Doll’s Laundry Bag. (Pattern I.)

  On the ends of the bag, work in cross-stitch, the “bunny” design
  given on this page.

  Make bag in same way as Doll’s Laundry Bag.

   “In the morning, before ’twas light,
    Two little bunnies began to fight;
    They fit all day and they fit all night:
    That made each such a mad little bun?
    Because both were in cross-stitch done,”

sang Scissors Shears.

“I’ll excuse you for interrupting,” said Fairy Lady, “but when Mary
Marie gets all these things,

   “Oh! won’t she be grand!
    Won’t she be grand!
    There’s not a lady
    In the land
    Who can with her compare.”

[Illustration: Bunny design]

Then Scissors Shears interrupted again,

       “Alas! Alack!
        If on my back
   I wore such lovely, lovely clothes
   I’d never freeze my little toes,
   Nor wiggle up my little nose.”

[Illustration: “Enough of this fun”]

“Oh,” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion,

   “If I could wear such lovely garb,
    I then would feel no deadly barb
    Of arrows aiméd at my heart.
    That’s a grand rhyme! Am I that smart?”

Then Sewing Bird,

   “Enough of this fun
      For to-day.
   Away, you rascals―
      Run away!

[Illustration: “Am I that smart?”]

“but,

   “Mary Frances, if you please,
    Take the patterns, and make these
    Pretty things―a lot of fun!
    Let me see them when they’re done.”

[Illustration: She drew these patterns from under the cushion]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXXII]

CHAPTER XXXII

WHO STOLE MARY MARIE’S CLOTHES


MARY FRANCES stepped into the sewing room. She had Mary Marie’s trunk
under her arm.

[Illustration: “They’re gone! They’re gone!”]

“Oh, did you finish the cute little muff and tippet, and work bag,
your Seamstress-ship?” asked Fairy Lady.

“Yes, indeed,―I’ll show them to you,” said Mary Frances, lifting the
lid of the trunk.

“Oh, mercy!” she cried, “Oh, dear! Oh, my! Oh―oh!”

“Why, what’s the matter?” asked Fairy Lady and Scissors Shears in one
breath.

“Why,―they’re gone! They’re gone! They’re gone―the trunk is empty!
Who could have stolen them? Ou―ou―! Ou! Ou!”

“They’re gone!” sobbed Scissors Shears.

“They’re gone!” cried Emery Bag.

“They’ve went!” said Tommy Pin Cushion.

[Illustration: “They’re gone!” cried Emery Bag]

[Illustration: “What shall we do?”]

“What―shall―I―do? What―shall―I―do? What―shall―I―do?” sobbed
Mary Frances.

“What was in there?” asked Fairy Lady.

“Oh, that sweet little kimono and Mary Marie’s bath robe,
and―her―her―everything―they were all in the trunk. Last night,
when I finished her tippet, I put that in. I’m sure I did! I wanted
to show them all to Mother, and now, I won’t have them. Oh, dear!
Mary Marie has on her nightie―that’s all that’s left of her lovely,
lovely things!”

“Perhaps you didn’t put them in the trunk,” suggested Scissors
Shears; “one can be mistaken about such things.”

“I feel certain―sure,” said Mary Frances, “but I’ll go look in my
room again.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“I’m so sorry,” said Fairy Lady, “I didn’t think she’d mind so. We
don’t want to hurt her feelings.”

“What shall we do?” asked Scissors Shears. “We don’t dare tell her
until the last lesson―the King said―”

As Mary Frances neared the door she heard voices; but when she stepped
in, all was still. She was crying as hard as ever.

[Illustration: “I feel certain―sure”]

[Illustration: “Will I, dear, dear Fairy Lady?”]

“No,” she sobbed, “they’re not there! They are all gone!”

Then suddenly remembering how everyone had stopped talking, she began
to be curious.

“Why!” she said, “can it be possible that you know anything about
them?”

They all looked guilty and waited for Fairy Lady to answer.

“Listen, little Lady Seamstress,” said Fairy Lady, “you will find
them all again!”

Mary Frances began to dry her tears.

“Will I? Will I, dear, dear Fairy Lady? Why,―how? They are not gone
forever?”

“No,” smiled Fairy Lady, “they are not―they are yours; and we will
help you find them. We don’t quite know where they are now; but if―

   “Little Marie has lost her clothes,
      And can’t tell where to find them;
    Let them alone, and they’ll come home,
      With all their buttons behind them.”

[Illustration: “You will find them all again!”]

“Oh, thank you, my dear friends,―when will that be?” cried Mary
Frances, brightening up.

“Not until to-morrow. Come early if you can―we think we will get
word from the Thimble King to-morrow; but we must wait.”

“Is it a secret? Oh, I’m so relieved!” said Mary Frances, “and
Mary Marie will be all right in this warm weather in only her
nightie;―but I can borrow one of Angie’s dresses! I forgot!―I’ll go
put it on her.”

[Illustration: “What―shall―I―do? What―shall―I―do?”]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXXIII]

CHAPTER XXXIII

MARY FRANCES VISITS THIMBLE LAND


“TO-DAY I am to know all about where your dresses went, my dear Mary
Marie, and I’m so excited I can hardly wait,” said Mary Frances,
hugging the dolly close to her as she went into the sewing room.

[Illustration: “I am so excited!”]

Sewing Bird did not look up at her, nor seem to notice what she said.

“I wonder why Sewing Bird doesn’t glance at me,” she thought. “Dear
little bird, she may be tired. I’m tired, too, really! Hu―hm,” she
yawned, and leaned back in her chair, holding her arms closely about
Mary Marie. “I believe I’ll just shut my eyes and wait for Sewing
Bird to ‛come to.’”

Everything was quiet for a while, then suddenly a voice―the voice of
Sewing Bird―

   “She’s just in time!
     A minute more―
   She never could
     Get in the door!”

[Illustration: “She’s just in time!”]

Mary Frances looked at Sewing Bird.

“How do you do, Sewing Bird, dear,” she said.

“Come,” said Sewing Bird, “we must hurry. Come!”

[Illustration: “Don’t you want to go?”]

“We’re here!” laughed Mary Frances. “Why ‘hurry,’ or why ‘come’?”

“Don’t spend time talking,” exclaimed Sewing Bird rather impatiently.

Mary Frances remembered it was the first time she had ever spoken
other than most gently to her.

“If you do, you may think we’re there now.”

“Why, she must be crazy,” thought Mary Frances. “What a way to talk!”

“No,” she said aloud, “I think we’re here now―but when we’re there,
we’re―

“Don’t you want to go?” asked Sewing Bird.

“Of course!” said Mary Frances, although she’d no notion where.

“Well, that’s good,” said the little bird.

[Illustration: “Of course!” said Mary Frances]

“Good!” said Scissors Shears.

[Illustration: “Let’s be off”]

“Let us be off,” said Sewing Bird.

“Off!” said Scissors Shears.

“Sounds as though we were off,” said Mary Frances.

“Not yet,” said Sewing Bird. “Here!” And she jumped up and pecked
Mary Frances between her shoulders.

The little girl had the strangest sensation. She suddenly felt as
light as air,―as though her body weighed nothing. Her nose felt
strange, and she thought she ought to find her handkerchief.

“It was in my pocket, I am sure,” she said, and started to find her
pocket. Imagine her surprise when she couldn’t find her hand.

“Why, where can it be?” she thought. “I’ll see if I can move my arm!”

She raised one arm, and then the other, and away she flew. Out the
window―and across the blue sky―she, nearly as blue as the sky
itself, if she had known it.

[Illustration: Away she flew]

“How lovely!” she tried to say aloud, but what she heard herself
singing was:

   “To float away,
    Far, far away,
    In clouds of blue
    And every hue―
    I flit my wing
    And sing and sing!”

Then came another voice:

   “I’m so glad, dear little friend,
    My trouble now is at an end;
    ’Twas indeed my task of love
    To turn you to a burnished dove.”

[Illustration]

She looked around, and there was Sewing Bird flying beside her, and
another tiny little blue bird, keeping close to Sewing Bird.

   “What a dear little
      Bird of blue!
    Is she, dear friend,
      A friend of you?”

she asked.

[Illustration: “What a dear little Bird of blue!”]

   “A friend she is
      Indeed of me―
    But more of you―
      It’s Miss Marie!”

answered Sewing Bird.

[Illustration: “She makes a beauteous bird”]

   “My dear sweet dolly,
      I declare!
    She makes a beauteous bird―
      And rare!”

sang Mary Frances.

   “Now, turn again
      To the right wing―
    To Thimble Land
      We safely bring,”

sang Sewing Bird. And Mary Frances, the Dove; and Mary Marie, the
Blue Bird; and Sewing Bird Fairy Lady stood before a golden gate.

[Illustration: “To Thimble Land We safely bring”]

“You’ll have to become a Thimble Person to enter,” smiled Fairy
Lady, and she touched Mary Frances’ right wing with her bodkin wand;
and Mary Frances felt herself stiffen and stiffen.

[Illustration: “She’s Bees Wax”]

“What am I now, please?” she asked Fairy Lady.

“You’re a Work Basket,” said Fairy Lady.

“How curious it feels,” said Mary Frances. “And Mary Marie―what is
she?” she asked.

“She’s Bees Wax,” whispered Fairy Lady.

“Who’s there?” came a voice at the gate, and before Mary Frances
could look for Mary Marie, “The pass-word?” came the same voice.

“P. P. B. S.,” answered Fairy Lady.

“What’s that mean, please?” asked Mary Frances.

“Patience and Perseverance―Bring―Success,” answered Fairy Lady.

“Enter,” said Big Thimble, opening the gates, and Mary Frances and
Mary Marie, and Fairy Lady walked in.

Everybody was there! Scissors Shears, Silver Thimble, Pen Cil, Needle
Book, and all the others.

My! they were delighted to see them, and gathered about, asking all
kinds of questions.

[Illustration: “You’re a Work Basket”]

“How does it seem to be a basket?” asked Scissors Shears.

[Illustration: “It’s lovely to be able to speak”]

“I feel just a little wooden,” said Mary Frances, “and rather too
large around for my arms,―but very contented.”

“Oh, Bees Wax,” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion, talking to Mary Marie,
“you always had a waxen look to me.”

“It is lovely to be able to speak,” said Bees Wax, otherwise Mary
Marie. “I would like to thank Mamma, and you all―”

“Here comes His Majesty!” exclaimed Scissors Shears. Everybody bowed
toward the ground except Fairy Lady, and Mary Frances Work Basket,
and Mary Marie Bees Wax.

Mary Frances looked up.

Coming between two huckleberry bushes (trees, Mary Frances thought
them) was an airship made of golden basketry. Gracefully down it
floated, with a little zdud! zdud! sound, and in it sat―Mary Frances
knew him in a minute―the King of Fairy Thimble Land!

His coat was of green and gold, but it was so glossy and fine that
Mary Frances thought it was spun of cobwebs. He held a long golden
needle in his hand.

[Illustration: “Oh, Bees Wax,” laughed Tommy Pin Cushion]

[Illustration: Mary Frances was herself again―but a very tiny self]

[Illustration: “Attention!” roared the King]

Mary Frances was herself again―but a very tiny self and fine that
Mary Frances thought it was spun of cobwebs. He held a long golden
needle in his hand.

“Where are they?” he asked.

“Your Majesty,” said Fairy Lady, “here they are!”

“Oh,” said the King of Thimble Land to Mary Frances Work Basket, and
Mary Marie Bees Wax. “Step up and bow!”

Mary Frances tried to kneel, thinking this was proper, but the King
touched her with his wand; then he touched Bees Wax.

Mary Frances was herself again―but a very tiny self―not so large as
Sewing Bird Fairy Lady,―and beside her was a little girl with golden
curls, just half as tall as Fairy Lady.

“Mother!” said the tiny little thing, smiling to Mary Frances.

“Attention!” roared the King of Thimble Land.

“I beg your Majesty’s pardon,” said Mary Frances, “but she’s never
spoken to me before―and”―

“That will do,” said the King. “If a doll is more important than
I,―sew her up!”

“In what, Your Majesty?” asked Bod Kin.

[Illustration: “I beg your Majesty’s pardon”]

[Illustration: “I didn’t mean it that way!”]

“Oh, no, no!” exclaimed Mary Frances. “I didn’t mean it that way!”

“You better not!” said the King. “But I understand,”―he added,
seeing Mary Frances look sad. “You must know I understand how you
feel,

   “When you see
      All her lost dresses,
    On this tree,”

and he pointed to a little tree nearby. There were all Mary Marie’s
pretty lost clothes!

“You may take them with you,” said the King, smiling.

“Never in all the years of Thimble History,” he went on, “have we
been so interested in any little girl. I borrowed these to show some
other little girls what patience and perseverance will do.

“Now, I am going to bestow on you one of my loveliest gifts; for I saw
all your beautiful work, and the Grand Sampler! A prize indeed, you
shall have! From to-day, the Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try is yours―to
keep! We give one something like it to all good girls who try to do
their best, but yours is the Fairy Needle-of-Don’t-Have-to-Try.

[Illustration: “You may take them with you”]

[Illustration: “We’d love to keep you longer”]

“And one more surprise! You may tell your mother about us, and
explain about the dolly’s clothes. Please pack them all, attendants!”

“Here’s the suit case!” said Fairy Lady, handing out Mary Marie’s
little suit case, “and over there is the trunk. Put the caps in the
tray, remember!”

“You have saved us from being Never-Nevers,” continued the King,
“because you kept the secret until you finished the lessons. And now,
that you are going―here is a bag of useful gifts for you to open
when you reach home. Pack the bag in the suit case, attendants.”

“We’d love to keep you longer―you, and sweet Mary Marie―but your
Grandma has called you twice. You may show her all the pretty things
you’ve made, when you get home. Let us know when you want us again,
unless you wish” (and the King laughed) “to say forever―Good-bye.
Who’ll say Good-bye forever?” he asked.

“Oh, Your Majesty, not I!” said Mary Frances.

[Illustration: “Pack the bag in the suit case, attendants”]

“Not I!” answered every one of the Thimble People.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary Frances opened her eyes. Did Sewing Bird or Dick Canary sing,

“Not I!”

[Illustration: Out the window―and across the blue sky]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXXIV]

CHAPTER XXXIV

WHAT WAS IN THE FAIRY BAG


THESE are the things Mary Frances found in the bag in Mary Marie’s
suit case when she got home:


PATTERN 27.―DOLL’S RAIN COAT

See Insert V

[Illustration: Rain Coat]

  NOTE.―Make rain coat about an inch longer than cape.

  To cut out―

  1. Cut out by pattern of Fur-lined Cape.

  In the fronts, cut open the Arm Flap Opening.

  _Do not_ cut a collar.

  2. Cut hood, having arrow edge (➸) of pattern on lengthwise fold
  of goods.

  3. Cut four arm flaps.

  To make―

  1. Make in same way as Fur-lined Cape, but without a lining.
  Press seams open.

  2. _Before joining shoulder seams_, face fronts back as in making
  Automobile Coat.

  3. Pin two arm flaps together, right sides facing.

[Illustration: Pin two arm flaps together]

  Stitch one-eighth inch from all edges except the arrow edge (➸).
  Turn inside out.

  Baste along the stitched edges.

  Stitch along the basted edges.

  4. Sew to flap-opening in position shown by dotted lines on
  pattern.

[Illustration: Draw up gathers to fit head]

  As in putting on a band, stitch first through a single thickness
  of open edge of flap. Turn; baste and hem down other edge.

  5. Overhand closely and blanket-stitch the under edge of flap
  opening.

  6. Make a very narrow hem around the circular edge of hood, or
  line with plaid silk.

  7. Three-quarter inch from edge of hood (see dotted line on
  pattern) run a gathering thread of very coarse cotton. Do not
  draw up the gathers.

  8. Make a three-quarter inch hem in bottom of coat.

  9. Matching double notches carefully, pin the hood to the coat,
  with wrong sides facing each other.

  Join hood to coat with French seam.

  10. Try coat on doll. Draw up and fasten the gathers of hood to
  fit head.


PATTERN 28.―DOLL’S POLO CAP

See Insert VIII

  To cut―

  (Material: white corduroy.)

  1. Cut four pieces like pattern of Polo Cap.

[Illustration: To stitch facing]

  2. Cut a bias strip of goods, two and one-half inches wide, twelve
  and one-half inches long.

  To make―

  1. Beginning at the point, baste sections of cap together, right
  sides facing each other.

  Match the notches.

  Stitch each seam.

  2. Join ends of bias strip or band, in a plain seam.

[Illustration: Scalloped edge of lace for sleeves]

  3. Turn in one edge of band one-quarter inch.

  4. Turn cap wrong side out.

  Baste other edge of band to the edge of cap, having the right sides
  of band and cap facing.

  In doing this work, stretch edge of bias band a little.

  5. Stitch one-quarter inch from edge.

  6. Turn band or facing up on wrong side.

  Baste and hem in place.

  (See dotted line on pattern.)

  7. Turn cap right side out.

  Turn up faced edge of cap on outside, nearly the full width.


PATTERN 29.―DOLL’S WEDDING DRESS

  NOTE.―Cut and make a guimpe of lace. (Pattern 19.)

  Do not use bands for sleeves, but cut sleeves narrower than
  pattern, and place the scalloped edge of lace at ends of sleeves.

[Illustration: Turn facing up on wrong side]


To Cut Wedding Dress

See Insert X

  1. Spread goods out on table.

  2. Pin pattern for Front of Wedding Dress with arrow on
  lengthwise of goods.

[Illustration: Bring folded edge over to basting]

  3. Pin pattern for Back of Wedding Dress on goods.

  Place the shoulders of both patterns together. Cut out. (See
  picture.)

  4. Prick, with a pin, through lines showing the plaits, or use
  a tracing wheel. Remove pattern, and run basting thread through
  these pinholes.

  Cut a separate train,―for lining of the train of wedding dress.
  Cut it like the pattern of the train.

  To make―

  1. Baste lining train-section to train of dress, right sides
  facing.

  Stitch one-quarter inch from edge. Turn, and baste along edges.

  2. To Make Plaits―

  Fold goods backward along the lines of basting nearest the
  center-front and center-back. Baste.

  Bring folded edge over to other line of basting.

  3. Lay flat, and baste all the way to bottom of dress and train.
  Press with a warm iron.

  4. Stitch plaits down four inches from the waist line in front,
  and three inches in back.

[Illustration: Pin shoulders together]

  5. Finish neck with a very narrow hem. Work French knots around the
  hem.

  6. Make a narrow hem from waist line in front, across the shoulders,
  to waist line in back.

[Illustration: Spider’s Web]

  7. Join skirt with French seams.

  8. Face the skirt, under arms, with an inch-wide bias facing.

  9. Open plaits at bottom of dress.

  10. Cut a bias facing one and one-quarter inches wide,
  for bottom of dress. Baste facing on right side. Stitch
  one-quarter inch from edge. Turn up on wrong side.

  Baste. Turn in, and hem the facing on wrong side.

11. Turn in and hem the facing of train.


PATTERN 30.―LADIES’ WORK BAG

  Cut bag ten inches wide, and twenty-eight inches long. Make like
  Laundry Bag. Do not overhand seams, but make French seams.

  Or,

  Use a large flowered handkerchief.

  1. Fold handkerchief through the center, wrong side out.

  2. Stitch through the center of the folded handkerchief.

  3. Fold over on the stitching.

  4. Stitch, or overhand the two folded edges which are lying
  together.

  5. On one side of handkerchief turn down one thickness of goods.
  (Like an envelope flap.)

[Illustration: Ladies’ Work Bag]

[Illustration: Ladies belt design]

  Do the same to the other side. “Tack” the center of the upper part
  of the folded edge of the flap to the _single_ thickness lying just
  beneath. Do same to other side

  6. Make a small “box” plait (or double plait) in each single
  thickness of handkerchief at top.

  7. Sew the plaits together, and fasten a loop between the plaits.

  Finish bag with two little cotton balls, sewed to the lowest point.

  This makes a many-pocketed bag, and would be a pleasing Christmas
  gift to your mother.


PATTERN 31.―LADIES’ BELT

  1. Buy belting which is sold by the running yard.

  2. Embroider the design given on this page upon the belt.

  Trace design through carbon paper; or transfer by tracing through
  tissue page, and turning the picture face-down on the material;
  trace picture again on wrong side.


PATTERN 32.―BABIES’ BIB

[Illustration: NECK OF BIB]

  1. Buy smallest size “huck-a-back” towel.

  2. Embroider on it the cross-stitch design given on this page.

  3. Through tracing paper, copy outline of neck given on this
  page. Cut out pattern.

  4. Fold towel through center lengthwise.

  Cut neck by pattern.

[Illustration: Cross stitch pattern]

[Illustration: 29. Wedding Dress]

[Illustration: INSERT 10

PATTERNS 20·29·

  20. PARTY DRESS
  29. WEDDING DRESS]

This pattern plate should remain permanently in book so that tracings
on tissue paper can be made from it as required.


  5. Bind neck with cotton or linen tape, leaving ends long enough
  to tie.


PATTERN 33.―GIRLS’ COLLAR


[Illustration: Girls’ Collar pattern
CUT OUT NECK―THEN JOIN A TO A B TO B]

  1. Trace pattern of collar through tissue or transfer paper. Cut
  out.

  2. Place pattern with double ring (oo) edge on a lengthwise fold
  of linen.

  3. Trace design on collar.

  4. Embroider scallops with close blanket stitches.

  5. Embroider rings with close “over-and-under” stitches―Satin
  Stitch.


41.―FRENCH HEMMING ON DAMASK

  For folding table linen or damask, fold and crease a very narrow
  hem, then fold the hem back on the right side, and overhand the
  edge thus folded. Press open on right side.

  NOTE.―Or, run through the hemmer of the sewing machine, having
  the needle unthreaded, using a very fine stitch: proceed as above.


42.―DARNING STOCKINGS

  1. In learning to darn, it is well to use a piece of flexible
  card board, three and one-half inches long by three inches wide.

  2. With a large needle, puncture it three-quarters of an inch
  from the top, and three-quarters of an inch from the bottom,
  making holes one-eighth of an inch apart.

  3. Use zephyr, in a tapestry needle, and work as in picture on this
  page.

  4. Weave, with a contrasting shade of zephyr, in and out of the long
  stitches already taken.

  Cut a hole in a piece of muslin: draw edge together with the fingers,
  and darn with cotton thread as above. Stockings are darned in the
  same way. In actual darning never use a knot.


43.―DARNING WOOLEN GOODS

[Illustration: Darning Stitch]

  Darning is usually done by use of the running stitch. Use fine
  thread―cotton is preferred, about the size of the weaving
  threads of the goods. Draw the edges of the tear together, and
  weave across the opening with the running stitch. If the tear is
  very large, first baste a piece of goods like the garment under
  the tear, and take the stitches into this. Sometimes a raveling
  thread of the material is used to make an almost invisible darn.


44.―PATCHING ON GINGHAM

  1. Cut the hole to make a small square, clip corners, turn edges
  back and baste.

  2. Cut piece of goods three-quarters of an inch larger, on each
  side, than the hole thus formed, being careful to match figures
  of material. Clip corners off this piece and turn goods back on
  right side one-quarter of an inch, and crease.

  3. Pin and baste this under the hole, matching figures carefully,
  and hem down, on right side and wrong side. Remove bastings.

[Illustration:

  GINGHAM      FLANNEL

Patching]

[Illustration]

  NOTE.―Or a piece of goods may be cut one-quarter of an inch
  larger than the hole on each side and edges turned back
  one-quarter of an inch. Overhand each edge of the patch to each
  edge of the hole.


45.―PATCHING ON FLANNEL

  This is done in the same way as the hemmed patch on gingham,
  except that the edges are not turned in, but are catch-stitched
  down on both right and wrong side, as shown in picture.


46.―SPIDER’S WEB

  An ornamental lace stitch.

  Use a piece of muslin three inches by six inches for practice.

  1. Fold it and baste edges. Thread a large needle with the red
  cotton, as used in former lessons.

  Draw or trace a figure like drawing shown on page 273.

  2. From underside of muslin, enter needle at _a_; pull through;
  point downward at _b_, upward at _c_, downward at _d_, upward at
  _e_, downward at _f_.

  3. On wrong side, bring needle to the center _g_, at the crossing
  of the long stitches, and pull through to right side.

  4. Holding muslin in left hand, point the threaded eye of the
  needle toward you, under the thread _ge_; pull through; under
  _gd_, and _ga_, under _gf_, and continue until web is formed.
  Fasten in usual manner.

[Illustration: Doll’s Wedding Dress]




[Illustration: CHAPTER XXXV]

CHAPTER XXXV

MARY FRANCES AT HOME


MARY FRANCES came into her mother’s room on the evening of the day
they all reached home.

“Oh, Mother, I have the loveliest surprise for you! Please shut your
eyes and don’t peep. It will take me some time to get it ready.”

[Illustration: “Oh, Mother, I have the loveliest surprise for you!”]

“Yes, dear,” smiled her mother, “but I’m very anxious to see!”

Mary Frances unlocked Mary Marie’s trunk, and spread all the contents
out on the bed.

“I’ll be back in one minute. Don’t you peep, Mother, dear!” she
begged as she ran out of the room.

She brought back Mary Marie, dressed in her party dress and summer
hat, and sat her up on the pillow.

“Now,” she cried, kissing her mother, “now, you may look, Mother,
dear!”

“Why, what in the world, my dear little girl? Where did all these
lovely clothes come from?”

[Illustration: “Why, what in the world, my dear little girl?”]

[Illustration: “She spends hours in the sewing room.”]

[Illustration: Showed bundle of patterns]

“I made them, Mother,―I mean―I, and the Thimble People.”

“You made them!” exclaimed her mother; “not that lovely kimono
and bath robe, and those cunning little bonnets, and that lovely
automobile coat!”

“Every one!” cried Mary Frances, dancing up and down.

“Why, dear,” said her mother, “I cannot believe my eyes! I thought
you did very, very well in the few sewing lessons by mail, but I
never dreamed―”

“If the Thimble People hadn’t helped me, Mother, I never could have
made them; and if you hadn’t sent me the beautiful goods, and my
dear, lovely dolly, I couldn’t have done it! It had to be a secret
until I finished the lessons―I couldn’t tell Grandma,―and I was
crazy to tell you!”

“Who are the Thimble People?” asked her mother. Then Mary Frances
told all about her new friends.

When she finished, she showed the bundle of patterns last given her
by the Thimble King.

“We’ll make these together, Mother, dear―if you say so?”

“I certainly do say so, dear,” said her mother.

[Illustration: “Who are the Thimble People?”]

[Illustration]

“I would like to take some lessons myself―such delightful lessons;
will you teach me?”

“I’ll do my best,―and―I just believe the Thimble People will help!”
said Mary Frances wisely;―and she thought she surely saw Scissors
Shears wink at her.

[Illustration: “Now, you may look, Mother dear”]




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s note:

2. There are many mis-matched double-quotes in the original book.
   These have been corrected in this eBook.

3. Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
   errors.

4. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.

5. ‘LIST of PATTERNS’ - Doll’s Nightgown page 130 corrected to
   page 127.


