




                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation has been standardised but all other spelling and
punctuation remains unchanged.

Where digits in the original are illegible this is
indicated by [TN: illegible]

Italics are represented thus _italic_ and bold thus =bold= .




               Sent Free of Postage on Receipt of Price.

       *       *       *       *       *

 Dick’s One Hundred Amusements for Evening Parties, Picnics and Social
 Gatherings. This book is full of Original Novelties. It contains:

 _New and Attractive Games, clearly illustrated by means of Witty
 Examples, showing how each may be most successfully played._

 _Surprising Tricks, easy of performance._

 _Musical and other innocent sells._

 _A variety of new and ingenious puzzles._

 _Comical Illusions, fully described. These surprising and grotesque
 illusions are very startling in their effects, and present little or
 no difficulty in their preparation._


            ALSO AN ENTIRELY NEW VERSION OF THE CELEBRATED
                      “MRS. JARLEY’S WAX WORKS.”

[Illustration: THE FLEXIBLE GIANT. A COMIC ILLUSION.]

Illustrated and explained by sixty fine wood engravings.

  Illuminated paper covers                          =30 cts.=
  Bound in boards, with cloth back                  =50 cts.=


 The Art and Etiquette of Making Love. A Manual of Love, Courtship and
                          Matrimony. It tells

[Illustration: Cherubs playing leap-frog]]

 _How to Cure Bashfulness;_

 _How to Commence a Courtship;_

 _How to Please a Sweetheart or Lover;_

 _How to Write a Love-Letter;_

 _How to  “Pop the Question”;_

 _How to Act Before and After a Proposal;_

 _How to Accept or Reject a Proposal;_

 _How to Break off an Engagement;_

 _How to Act After an Engagement;_

 _How to Act as Bridesmaid or Groomsman;_

 _How the Etiquette of a Wedding and the After-Reception Should be
 Observed;_

 And, in fact, how to fulfill every duty and meet every contingency
 connected with courtship and matrimony. It includes also a choice
 collection of sensible Letters suitable for all the contingencies of
 Love and Courtship.

  176 pages, paper covers         =30 cts.=
  Bound in boards, cloth back     =50 cts.=


         =Dick’s Quadrille Call-Book and Ball-Room Prompter.=
 Containing clear directions how to call out the figures of every
 dance, with the quantity of music necessary for each figure, and
 simple explanations of all the figures and steps which occur in Plain
 and Fancy Quadrilles. Also, a plain analysis and description of all
 the steps employed in the favorite round dances, fully describing:

  _The Opening March or Polonaise,_
  _Various Plain and Fancy Quadrilles,_
  _Waltz and Glide Quadrilles,_
  _Plain Lancers and Caledonians,_
  _Glide Lancers and Caledonians,_
  _Saratoga Lancers,_
  _The Parisian Varieties,_
  _The Prince Imperial Set,_
  _Social and Basket Quadrilles,_
  _Nine-Pin and Star Quadrilles,_
  _Gavotte and Minuet Quadrilles,_
  _March and Cheat Quadrilles,_
  _Favorite Jigs and Contra-Dances,_
  _Polka and Polka Redowa,_
  _Redowa and Redowa Waltz,_
  _Polka Mazourka and Old Style Waltz,_
  _Modern Plain Waltz and Glide,_
  _Boston Dip and Hop Waltz,_
  _Five-Step Waltz and Schottische,_
  _Varsovienne and Zulma L’Orientale,_
  _Galop and Deux Temps,_
  _Esmeralda, Sicilienne, Danish Dance_

            AND OVER ONE HUNDRED FIGURES FOR THE  “GERMAN;”

 To which is added a Sensible Guide to Etiquette and Proper Deportment
 in the Ball and Assembly Room, besides seventy pages of dance music
 for the piano.

  Paper covers        =50 cts.=
  Bound in boards     =75 cts.=


                    =Uncle Josh’s Trunkful of Fun.=
 A portfolio of first-class Wit and Humor, and never-ending source of
 Jollity.

                    CONTAINING A RICH COLLECTION OF

  _Comical Stories, Cruel Sells,_
  _Side-Splitting Jokes,_
  _Humorous Poetry,_
  _Quaint Parodies,_
  _Burlesque Sermons,_
  _New Conundrums,_
  _Mirth-Provoking Speeches,_
  _Curious Puzzles,_
  _Amusing Card Tricks,_ _and_
  _Astonishing Feats of Parlor-Magic._

[Illustration: Laughing Man]

  This book is illustrated with nearly 200 Funny Engravings, and
    contains 64 large octavo double-column pages.        =15 cts.=


           =Barber’s American Book of Ready-Made Speeches.=
 Containing 159 original examples of Humorous and Serious Speeches,
 suitable for every possible occasion where a speech may be called for,
 with appropriate replies to each.

                               INCLUDING

 _Presentation Speeches._
 _Convivial Speeches._
 _Festival Speeches._
 _Addresses of Congratulation._
 _Addresses of Welcome._
 _Addresses of Compliment._
 _Political Speeches._
 _Dinner and Supper Speeches for Clubs, etc._
 _Off-Hand Speeches on a Variety of Subjects._
 _Miscellaneous Speeches._
 _Toasts and Sentiments for Public and Private Entertainments._
 _Preambles and Resolutions of Congratulation, Compliment and
 Condolence._

 With this book any person may prepare himself to make a neat little
 speech, or reply to one when called upon to do so. They are all short,
 appropriate and witty, and even ready speakers may profit by them.

  Paper                             =50 cts.=
  Bound in boards, cloth back       =75 cts.=


             =The Amateur Trapper and Trap-Maker’s Guide.=
 A complete and carefully prepared treatise on the art of Trapping,
 Snaring and Netting; containing plain directions for constructing the
 most approved Traps, Snares, Nets and Dead-Falls; the best methods of
 applying them to their various purposes; and the most successful Baits
 for attracting all kinds of Animals, Birds, etc., with their special
 uses in each case; introducing receipts for preparing Skins and Furs
 for Market.

[Illustration: A Trap]

 The entire work is based on the experience of the most successful
 Trappers, and on information derived from other authentic professional
 sources. By Stanley Harding. This comprehensive work is embellished
 with fifty well drawn and engraved illustrations; and these, together
 with the clear explanations which accompany them, will enable anybody
 of moderate comprehension to make and set any of the traps described.
 IT TELLS

 _How to make all kinds of Traps;_
 _How to make all kinds of Snares;_
 _How to Set and Secure Traps;_
 _How to Attract Animals from a Distance;_
 _How to Prepare Baits;_
 _How to Bait a Trap;_
 _How to Trap or Snare all kinds of Animals;_
 _How to Trap or Snare Birds of every description;_
 _How to Cure and Tan Skins;_
 _How to Skin and Stuff Birds or Animals._

It also gives the baits usually employed by the most successful Hunters
and Trappers, and exposes their secret methods of attracting and
catching Animals, Birds, etc., with scarcely a possibility of failure.

  Large 16mo, paper covers        =50 cts.=
  Bound in boards, cloth back     =75 cts.=


                     =How to Write a Composition.=
 The use of this hand-book will save the student the many hours of
 labor too often wasted in trying to write a plain composition. It
 affords a perfect skeleton of one hundred and seventeen different
 subjects, with their headings or divisions clearly defined, and each
 heading filled in with the ideas which the subject suggests: so that
 all the writer has to do, in order to produce a good composition, is
 to enlarge on them to suit his taste and inclination.

  178 pages, paper covers            =30 cts.=
  Bound in boards, cloth back        =50 cts.=

                      =The Magician’s Own Book.=
 One of the most extraordinary and interesting volumes ever
 printed—containing the Whole Art of Conjuring, and all the Discoveries
 in Magic ever made, either by ancient or modern philosophers. IT
 EXPLAINS

 _All Sleight of Hand Tricks;_
 _Tricks and Deceptions with Cards;_
 _The Magic of Chemistry;_
 _Mysterious Experiments in Electricity and Galvanism;_
 _The Magic of Pneumatics, Aerostatics, Optics, etc.;_
 _The Magic of Numbers;_
 _Curious Tricks in Geometry;_
 _Mysterious and Amusing Puzzles, and answers thereto;_
 _The Magic of Art;_
 _Miscellaneous Tricks and Experiments;_
 _Curious Fancies, etc., etc._

[Illustration: Two hands holding coins]

 The tricks are all illustrated by Engravings and Tables, so as to make
 them easily understood and practiced. As a volume for the amusement of
 an evening party, this book cannot be surpassed.

  Gilt binding, 362 pages                      =$1.50=


                =East Lynne; or, The Earl’s Daughter.=
 Library edition, complete and unabridged. This novel is Mrs. Henry
 Wood’s masterpiece, and stands in the very front rank of all the
 works of fiction ever written; it has scarcely a rival as a brilliant
 creation of literary genius, and is prominent among the very few works
 of its class that have stood the test of time, and achieved a lasting
 reputation. In originality of design, and masterly and dramatic
 development of the subject, East Lynne stands unrivaled; it will be
 read and re-read long after the majority of the ephemeral romances of
 to-day have passed out of existence and been forgotten. A handsome
 12mo volume of 598 pages, from new electrotype plates, printed on fine
 toned paper, and elegantly bound in cloth, in black and gold

  =$1.50=




                              FONTAINE’S

                     GOLDEN WHEEL FORTUNE-TELLER,

                                  AND

                              DREAM BOOK.


                    DICK & FITZGERALD, PUBLISHERS,
                            18 ANN STREET.




[Illustration: THE GOLDEN WHEEL FORTUNE TELLER.]




                                  THE

                       GOLDEN WHEEL DREAM-BOOK,

                                  AND

                            FORTUNE-TELLER,

BEING THE MOST COMPLETE WORK ON FORTUNE-TELLING AND INTERPRETING DREAMS
                      EVER PRINTED, CONTAINING AN

                ALPHABETICAL LIST OF DREAMS, WITH THEIR
                            INTERPRETATION,

                  AND THE LUCKY NUMBERS THEY SIGNIFY.

 ALSO EXPLAINING HOW TO TELL FORTUNES BY THE MYSTERIOUS GOLDEN WHEEL,
     WITH CARDS, DICE, AND DOMINOES. HOW TO TELL FUTURE EVENTS BY
      THE LINES OF THE HANDS, BY MOLES ON THE BODY, BY THE FACE,
           NAILS OF THE FINGERS, HAIR AND SHAPE OF THE HEAD.
               HOW TO FIND WHERE TO DIG FOR WATER, COAL,
                 AND ALL KINDS OF METALS, BY MEANS OF

                 THE CELEBRATED DIVINING OR LUCK ROD.

HOW TO TELL THE TEMPER AND DISPOSITION OF ANYBODY, HOW TO TELL FORTUNES
  WITH TEA LEAVES AND COFFEE GROUNDS, SIGNS OF THE MOON’S AGE, LUCKY
          AND UNLUCKY DAYS, TOGETHER WITH CHARMS TO MAKE YOUR
           SWEETHEART LOVE YOU, AND TO MAKE A LOVER POP THE
            QUESTION, WITH TWENTY WAYS OF TELLING FORTUNES
                   ON NEW YEAR’S EVE, AND A COMPLETE
                      LANGUAGE AND SIGNIFICATION
                            OF THE FLOWERS.

                          BY FELIX FONTAINE,
Professor of Astrology, and Lecturer on Astronomy and Spiritual Philosophy.

                 ILLUSTRATED WITH NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS.

                               NEW YORK:
                    DICK & FITZGERALD, PUBLISHERS,
                            18 ANN STREET.




                               CONTENTS.

                                                                   PAGE.

  Bride’s Omen                                                       129

  Bridge Omen                                                        132


  Candle Spell                                                       132

    “  Token                                                         129

  Card Charm                                                         127

  Cards, Fortune-telling with                                         94

  Cat Portent                                                        126

  Charm against Nightmare                                            130

  Charms and Magic Prognostications                                  124

  Cricket                                                            128

  Crow Sign                                                          129


  Death-tick                                                         128

  Dice, How to find Lucky Numbers with                                92

  Dice, How to tell Fortunes with                                    106

  Dominoes, How to tell Fortunes with                                101

  Dreams, about the Interpretation of                                  7

  Dreams, Alphabetical List of                                     10-92

    “   What are                                                       7


  Easter-water                                                       130


  Finger-nails, Signification of the                                 120

  Frog Prognostic                                                    129


  Golden Wheel, How to tell Fortunes by the                            3

  Golden Wheel of Fortune, The                                         3


  Hair Spell                                                         133

  Hair, To choose a Husband by the                                   119

  Hand, Telling Fortunes by the Lines of the                         109

  How a Girl may ascertain if she will ever marry                    125

  How to be sure of a Partner at a Dance                             129

  How to discover if your Wish will be Fulfilled                     100

  How to get a Sweetheart                                            130

  How to tell the first letter of your
  future Wife’s or Husband’s name                                    131


  Key and Book Charm                                                 126


  Language of Flowers                                                139

  Lead and Wax Spell                                                 131

  Lucky and Unlucky Days                                             133


  Means to compel Love                                               125

  Moles, Telling Fortunes by                                         114


  Nail Token                                                         133

  New Moon                                                           126

  New Year’s Eve, How to tell Fortunes on                            131

  Nutshell Witchery                                                  132


  Omen of Riches                                                     128


  Palmistry                                                          109

  Phrenology and Physiognomy                                         111


  Rabbit Augury                                                      130

  Rye Charm                                                          130


  Saucer Charm                                                       131

  Scissor or Knife Prognostic                                        126

  Sheep and Swine Token                                              130

  Shift Charm                                                         93

  Signs from the Moon’s age                                          137

  Sign of a Sneeze                                                   128

  Sign of Visitors                                                   126

  Sign when your Ear tingles                                         128

    “    “    “  Nose itches                                         128

    “    “  you wet your Apron                                       133

  Spider Omen                                                        127

  Star Augury                                                        129

  Strange Bed                                                        128

  Straw Sign                                                         126

  String Token                                                       128


  Table to find Lucky Numbers                                          9

  Tea or Coffee-Grounds, Fortune-telling by                          121

  Telling Fortunes by Dominoes and Dice                              100

  The Divining-rod, to tell where to dig for Water and Metals        134

  Thirty Physiological Significations                                142

  To find out whom one is to have for a Husband                       99

  To know if a Woman with Child will have a Girl or a Boy            129

  To know the Temper and Disposition of every one                    138

  To prepare a Love Potion                                           124


  What a Prick in the Finger signifies                               130

  What a Spider-web foretells                                        130


        Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1862,
                         BY DICK & FITZGERALD,
 In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States for
                  the Southern District of New York.




                              FONTAINE’S

                       GOLDEN WHEEL DREAM-BOOK,

                                  AND

                            FORTUNE-TELLER.


                     THE GOLDEN WHEEL OF FORTUNE.


This singular wheel was much consulted in the middle ages, and is said
to have been used by Cagliostro to aid him in his divinations. I have
selected it from an old Latin manuscript on Astrology, and translated
it into English for the benefit of those of my readers who cannot read
the former language. SEE FRONTISPIECE.


                  THE GOLDEN WHEEL OF FORTUNE SHOWS:

 I. _Whether you shall obtain the favor of the person you desire?_

 II. _If the querent shall meet with the preferment he wisheth for?_

 III. _Whether a sick person will recover?_

 IV. _If the said sickness will be long or short?_

 V. _Shall your expectation or wish succeed?_

 VI. _If it is good for you to marry, or otherwise?_

 VII. _Whether the friendship of a certain person will prove
 advantageous or not?_

 VIII. _Whether a person shall be rich or poor? etc., etc._


               HOW TO TELL FORTUNES BY THE GOLDEN WHEEL.

The person whose fortune is to be told, must place the wheel of
Fortune face downward, prick into a number (it is better to do it with
their eyes shut), then refer for an explanation, which stands at the
corresponding number as that you pricked into. (See Frontispiece.)

_The following observations answer for either sex, the party,
therefore, trying this wheel, must alter wife for husband, or just as
the answers may suit either party._

1. If this number is fixed upon, it assures the person that you will
marry an homely person, but rich.

2. Whatever your intentions are, for the present, decline them. Those
absent will return.

3. Shows loss of friends; bad success at law; loss of money;
unfaithfulness in love.

4. If your desires are extravagant, they will not be granted; but mind
how you make use of your fortune.

5. Very good fortune; sudden prosperity; great respect from high
personages; a letter bringing important news.

6. Look well to those who owe you money, if ever so little, a letter of
abuse may be expected.

7. Your lover will act constant and true toward you.

8. A friend has crossed the sea, and will bring home riches, by which
you will be much benefited.

9. A loving partner; success in your undertakings; a large and
prosperous family.

10. Your husband will not have a great fortune, but with your
assistance he is likely to live in middling circumstances.

11. A very sudden journey, with a pleasant fellow-traveller, and the
result of the journey will be generally beneficial to your family.

12. You may regain that which you have lost with great perseverance and
trouble.

13. A letter of importance will arrive, announcing the death of a
relative for whom you have no very great respect, but who has left you
a legacy.

14. By venturing carefully, you will gain doubly, though you will
suffer great privation.

15. You will meet with many crosses before you are comfortably settled.

16. Too sudden acquaintance with the opposite sex; but which will be
opposed; notwithstanding the party should persevere, as it will be to
his or her advantage.

17. An agreeable partner, a good temper, and a large family of children.

18. Let the chooser of this number persevere; for your schemes are
good, and must succeed.

19. You will marry young, and have dutiful children.

20. Your lover may be low in circumstances, but affectionate.

21. Your marriage will add to your welfare, and you will be very happy.

22. A drunken partner, bad success in trade, but the party will never
be very poor, though always unhappy.

23. Do not neglect your lover; let your conduct command respect.

24. You have many friends, and will probably have a large and virtuous
family.

25. Your travels will be prosperous, if you are prudent.

26. You have many enemies, who will endeavor to make you unhappy.

27. The luck that is ordained for you, will be coveted by others.

28. Be very prudent in your conduct, as this number is very precarious,
and much depends upon yourself; it is generally good.

29. Beware, or you will be deceived by the person you are paying your
attentions to.

30. You love one who is affectionate and true, and deserves respect.

31. You too fantastically refuse offers. Be prudent when you accept, or
you will be sorry.

32. You will be very unfortunate for a short time, but be careful, and
your situation will very soon alter.

33. A fortune will be yours, but be not over anxious.

34. Alter your intentions, or you will be sorry when it is too late.

35. You will have a rich, but jealous partner, and will live very
uncomfortably.

36. You will have a sober, steady, and affectionate partner, but poor.

37. A very good fortune, sudden prosperity, and a large family.

38. The persons who choose this unlucky number, must look well to their
conduct; or justice will overtake them.

39. Remain among your friends, then you will escape misfortune.

40. You will have an affectionate partner, but no family; and a large
fortune.

41. If you have a fortune, be charitable; if but little, be frugal.

42. You will have a quarrel with your lover, through jealousy.

43. You must bear your losses with fortitude.

44. You will get a handsome, young, and wealthy partner.

45. When your conduct changes, your fortune will mend, by marrying a
rich partner.

46. You have mixed with bad company, and you may depend on it, that you
will be brought to disgrace.

47. A large family of healthy children, give them learning, and they
will honor their father and mother.

48. You will be very unfortunate at first, but persevere, and your
schemes will be successful.

49. You have a number of secret enemies, who will try to do you an
injury; be on your guard and you will prosper.

50. Your happiness will consist in doing good: they are pleasing spots
in the memory, which vexations cannot erase.

51. You will die an old maid, you have been too whimsical in choosing
for yourself a partner.

52. Your lover will travel in Europe, and will be very successful.

53. You will marry a person with whom you will have but little comfort.

54. This is a very lucky number; whatever you do, will always prove
successful.

55. After much misfortune, you will be pretty comfortable and happy.

56. Good conduct will produce much luck and happiness.

57. Through affection you will marry unfortunately; but you must make
one another happy.

58. You have many lovers, but mind how you choose, or else you will
suffer for it.

59. Your lover is on his return home, but he has met with severe losses.

60. A letter announcing the loss of money.

61. You have a secret enemy, mind or he will do you some harm.

62. Warns you against the evil consequences of idleness, either in
yourself or partner.

63. Your partner will be very rich, but very neglectful.

64. You will be very poor and miserable, with one child.

65. Sincere love from an upright heart will be rewarded.

66. You will marry an old person with whom you will be very unhappy.

67. Plenty of offers will happen before one is worthy of acceptance, be
cautious how you make your choice.

68. You will play with the mouse till you lose it.

69. Take heed, you are being deceived by your lover.

70. You will meet with great trouble, you should have consulted your
friends.

71. Beware, the person you love, does not love you, he seeks your ruin.

72. If you marry in haste, you will be deceived, wait patiently, and
you will be happy.

73. Hard work, hard fare, little joy, and much care.

74. A scolding wife, but rich.

75. Your partner will be very rich, but will have no children.

76. You have a rival, be not deceived; depend on our tablets, and you
will better your condition.

77. You will have many children, but will be very poor.

78. Do not delay, hasten your marriage, or you will lose your virtue.

79. Your wife will have no children, and will be addicted to drinking
liquors.

80. Be honest and industrious, and you will triumph over your enemies.

81. You will have children, who, if you give them a good education,
will make you happy.

82. You will fall into great difficulties, you will lose your partner
and marry a drunkard.

83. Hasten your marriage; the person is faithful, and you will be happy.

84. You must break off the connection you have formed, or you will come
to absolute want.

85. Your lover is jealous of you, and will break off the connection.

86. You will travel in Europe, and be married there, but will have no
children.

87. You will get married, but not till you begin to get old.

88. Beware, you have a secret enemy who will try and do you some injury.

89. You will die an old maid.

90. You will marry three different times, and still be very poor and
miserable.

91. The person you are paying your attentions to, is deceitful.

92. If you marry, you will have great trouble, and many children; be
persuaded, and live single, then you will be happy.

93. You will live to a great age and be happy.

94. There is a young man dying in love for you, but mind you are not
led astray.

95. You will marry poor, but in the end be rich.

96. You are too whimsical and deceitful ever to be happy.

97. Be not flattered, for you have an amorous sweetheart.

98. A shocking accident will happen to you, or to your children, which
will cause great trouble.

99. You will discover your false lover.

100. You will have a very handsome, but artful partner.




                           WHAT ARE DREAMS?


I offer you in this work, my dear reader, all that can be collected
in reference to dreams. Notwithstanding the proverbial saying,  “All
dreams are lies,” we frequently see the realization of them, and by
them we are informed of more or less interesting events which afterward
happen to us. A prudent and enlightened man will therefore examine
carefully his dreams to know which he ought to interpret, neglecting
those which are extravagant because of too exalted an imagination or of
a disturbed digestion.

In consulting this book with attention, in seeking in it for the
explanation of your dreams, and calculating the causes which have
produced them, you will rarely depart from the truth, because you will
be following the rules of a wise combination, which will prevent you
from falling into an illusory if not fatal error.


              FOREKNOWLEDGE, OR INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS.

In the Holy Scriptures God says, that he  “will pour his Spirit on all
flesh, that the young men and maidens shall prophesy, the old men shall
see visions, and the young men dream dreams.” Both sacred and profane
history are full of so many examples of the fulfilment of dreams, that
he must be very skeptical and but little versed in natural science who
would refuse to have faith in them.

Hippocrates says that when the body is asleep the soul is awake, and
transports itself everywhere, where the body would be able to go, that
it knows and sees all that the body could know or see were it awake;
that it touches all the body could touch, in a word, that it performs
all the actions that the body of a sleeping man could do were he awake.

There are five kinds of dreams, differently named according to their
different qualities. The first is dream, the second vision, the third
oracle, the fourth revery, and the fifth apparition.

A dream is that which, while we are asleep, shows us the truth hidden
under certain figures, as when Joseph interpreted to king Pharaoh the
dream concerning the seven lean kine that devoured the seven fat ones;
the dream of the seven full ears of corn, etc.

A vision is simply a dream happening when the body is awake instead of
sleeping, as Vespasian when he saw the surgeon who had extracted Nero’s
tooth.

The oracle is a revelation, or information given us by some angel or
other celestial spirit who does God’s bidding. The angel appearing to
Joseph the husband of the Virgin, and to the wise men, are examples of
this.

Revery occurs when the passions are so vehement that they destroy the
mental equilibrium for a time. Then what one thinks of during the day
he will dream of at night, as a lover who has been thinking during the
day of his beloved one will continue to do so at night while he is
sleeping. Sometimes when one fears to meet a person, he will dream at
night that he has met him; having fasted during the day, he will dream
of eating, or, having been thirsty, of drinking. Avarice will make the
miser dream of his gold, and speak of it when sleeping, as he would not
do when awake.

Apparition is named Phantom by the Greeks, and is only that nocturnal
vision sometimes presented to children and weak-minded persons, who
imagine they see objects presented to intimidate or pain them.

Of these five kinds of dreams, the three first have an appearance of
truth, but the last two are absolutely false.

It is to be remarked, with regard to all dreams, that those of which
only parts are remembered, signify nothing at all; that those that
memory retains are good and true; that they ought to occur about
day-break, or at least after midnight, because until that time the
senses and the body are occupied in the labor of digestion, and the
mind disturbed by the remembrance of dinner, can dream of nothing
reasonable. Nevertheless Artemidorus says, that a sober, temperate, and
tranquil man can dream at any hour of the night, or even during the
day, and that the fulfilment of such dreams will be certain.

Some authors divide dreams into three kinds, namely, dreams of natural
objects, of animals, and of celestial objects. The natural things are
those by which physicians judge of the temperament; dreams of animals
show the passions and cares that the mind has felt during the day;
those of celestial objects are the intimations of divine things, as
for example, the statue that the king of Babylon saw when asleep, which
is so well explained by the prophet Daniel.

There are few persons who have the gift of dreaming that which will be
fulfilled, fewer still who know how to interpret them, because it is
necessary to observe many things not generally known.

There are two principal kinds of dreams, the speculative or
contemplative, and the allegorical or significative. To these one ought
to pay attention, the speculative happening in the fulfilment as it
occurred in dreams, for example: A prisoner in a small prison at Paris
dreamed that a cord was being attached to his neck to hang him, that
after it was done a stranger appeared with a sword who severed the cord
and delivered him from death; this was fulfilled the next day, for the
judge having pronounced his sentence, and given him to the hangman, he
was delivered by unknown persons employed by his friends. Allegorical
dreams on the contrary never happen as one has dreamed. Thus, to dream
of an angel, signifies revelation or good news, but to see a serpent
which tries to bite one signifies troubles arising from the envy of
others.

Speculative dreams are soon fulfilled, allegorical ones not so quickly;
a day or two often intervening between the dream and its completion.


                  ABOUT THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS.

 “Dreams? Nonsense!” I hear some grave-faced person cry. Indeed!
And where did this grave-faced person learn his wisdom? Not from
experience, I will engage. No, experience teaches us the reverse of
this. Dreams are _by no means_ nonsense. This I maintain openly in the
face of all the world.

I maintain even that _every dream has its signification_. Not that it
always discloses the future, I am far from asserting that. I say only
it _has its signification_. Commonly a dream "permits us to cast a
glance into the soul or into the heart of man. The thoughts which dwell
in the former, and the feelings which sway the latter, shape themselves
in sleep into various images, which throw a strong light upon the
character. There have no doubt been many extravagant fictions palmed
off as facts relative to dreams, but yet enough credible evidence
exists of their importance to make any strange dream the subject of
reflection and examination on the part of the dreamer; and it cannot be
denied that many things in our dreams are actually omens.


 A LIST OF DREAMS, WITH THEIR TRUE INTERPRETATION, TOGETHER WITH
 THE LUCKY NUMBERS OF THE LOTTERY WHICH THEY SIGNIFY.

ABOVE. To dream you see any thing hanging _above_ you signifies you
will improve in your worldly prospects, and soon be in a better
situation than you were before you had the dream. 76, 62, 14.

ABSENCE. To dream of absent persons, signifies that they will soon
return. It also denotes success in business. 4, 22.

ABSCESS. If you dream you have an abscess, or running sore on your
person, it foretells good fortune and good health, to be preceded by
sickness. 3, 27.

ABUSE. To dream that you are abused and insulted, is a sign that some
dispute will happen between you and some person with whom you have
business; if you are in love, be assured that some one has attempted to
injure you with the object of your affections, and that they have in a
great measure succeeded. 6, 38, 44.

ABUNDANCE. If you dream you have an over-abundance of any thing, it
goes by contrary, and is a sign of a scarcity; as if a farmer should
dream that he had a great crop, it would predict a scarcity—not perhaps
of that particular article of which he dreamed, but of something that
would be important to him. 15.

ABYSS. To see an abyss, or deep hole, is a warning; avoid, after such
a dream, taking a journey by land, or a voyage by sea, for eight-and
forty hours, because it forebodes accidents by travelling. 62, 19.

ACCIDENT. To dream that an accident has happened to you, or to any one
of your household, or with whom you live, foretells that you will see
some one whom you little expect to see. 72, 3, 11.

ACCOUNTS. Dreams that relate to making up accounts are good omens. If
you dream you found an error in your money account, it foretells that
you will have a piece of good luck. Accounts blotted with ink is a sign
of sickness. 14.

ACCUSE. To dream a person accuses you of any thing, is favorable to the
dreamer. 66, 4.

ACORN. (_See Oak._) To dream you see swine eating acorns denotes that
you will have reverses in business, and lose if you are not very
careful; to dream of picking acorns signifies that a rich relative will
leave you a fortune. 65.

ACQUAINTANCE. To dream you quarrel or fight with an acquaintance,
forebodes divisions in your own family; in love, unfaithfulness; and
losses in business. 42, 6.

ACTRESS. If you dream you love her, it is a sign you will meet with
adversities. If you dream you see her on the stage you will be
successful in all your undertakings. 68, 5, 18.

ADDER. To dream of this reptile is a sign that some one whom you think
friendly to you will injure you in some way. 19, 2.

ADULTERY. It is in most cases a bad omen to dream that you have
perpetrated this act. If the person you dreamed about is married, or
is a prostitute, you may almost be sure that some misfortune will
overtake you. If she is a virgin, it merely predicts that you will
shortly have an invitation to a wedding. For a married woman to dream
of adultery is a sign she will soon conceive and have a girl. To an
unmarried woman such a dream is a sign of misfortune. 51, 7, 3.

AGUE. To dream that you have one, warns you against an inclination to
strong drink; to dream your sweetheart has an ague, denotes affection
and happiness. 39, 6, 1.

AIR. To dream that you see it clear and serene, shows that you shall
be beloved and esteemed by most people; if at law, success. In short,
all good is denoted by clear and serene air. But to dream that the air
is thick, cloudy, dark, and troubled, denotes to the dreamer, grief,
sickness, loss of good, hindrance of business, and crosses in love. 12,
9.

ALMONDS. Signify riches and happiness; to eat them shows you will have
good luck in love matters. 73, 18, 10.

ALLIGATOR. (_See Reptile._)

ALMS. To dream they are begged of you, and you refuse them, shows want
and misery to the dreamer; but to dream you give them freely, is a sign
of joy and long life. 11, 13, 4.

ALTAR. To dream of an altar, betokens gladness, and affection in love.
Of an _Ark_, the same. 71, 63, 4.

ANCHOR. To dream you see one, signifies unexpected success in love; but
in business, it shows the success to be distant, and only obtainable
with care. 47, 36.

ANGEL. To dream you see angels in your sleep, is a sign some are near
you, and that the rest of your dream will come to pass. To see many
angels, is a sign of many children, and much prosperity. 16, 8, 24.

ANGER. (_See Rage._) To dream that you have been provoked to anger,
shows that you have powerful enemies; and warns you to be careful that
all you do should be strictly honorable; but it also signifies you will
hear good news, and be in a good humor. 44, 16.

ANGLING. (_See Fish._)

ANTS. To dream of ants, is unlucky; and to dream too often of them,
shows the dreamer not to be long lived. 7, 49, 20.

APES. (_See Monkey._) To dream you have seen or had any thing to do
with them, signifies malicious, though secret enemies; and warns you
against carrying on law-suits. 17, 6.

APPARITION. To dream you see an apparition or spirit, clothed in white,
signifies deceit, temptation to sin, and disappointment in love. 57.

The following is an old prediction in verse:

  To dream of seeing strange apparitions,
  As devils, hobgoblins, and such visions,
  Does show thy love, or thy sweetheart,
  Hath a fair face, but devil’s heart.

APPAREL. (_See Silks and Satins._) To dream that your clothes are
good, denotes prosperity and happiness; of white apparel, is good only
for clergymen; to others it is a sign of trouble; to mechanics, decline
of business; to the sick, death. If of black, however, it is of their
recovery; of rich scarlet apparel, is good for rich men, signifying
honor; but is death to the sick, and loss or captivity to the poor; to
dream of women’s apparel, is good for the unmarried; but to a married
man loss of his wife or sickness. 17, 20.

APPLES, or APPLE-TREES. (_See Orchard._) If sweet, denote joy and
pleasure, especially to women and maids. Sour apples signify contention
and sedition. 4, 11, 44.

APRICOTS. Content, health, and pleasure, if in season; if otherwise,
vain hopes, bad fortune. 22, 5, 64.

ARMS. To dream your arms are withered or lean, denotes affliction,
sickness and poverty; and if a woman, she is in danger of being a
widow. If any person dream his arms are hairy it denotes increase of
riches. 7.

ARMED MEN. (_See Zouave._)

ASHES. Great misfortune is at hand; to a lover or sweetheart, such a
dream forebodes that he or she will be jealous because of seeing some
one in company with their intended. 70.

ASP. To dream of the asp or adder, is a sign of designing enemies; but
it is good, if they do not bite you. 17, 4.

ASS. To dream you hear an ass bray, shows you will meet with some loss;
to see an ass run, signifies misfortune. 62, 18, 20.

ATTORNEYS. (_See Lawyer._) To dream you are speaking with them, shows
hindrance of business, and that it requires much circumspection to
insure success in your affairs. It also denotes loss of property. 16.

AWAKING. To dream you awake yourself is a happy end to all sorrow. To
awake another is a sign you will inspire with love the one you wish.
61, 4.

BACK. To dream that your back is broken, hurt, or scabby, shows that
your enemies will get the better of you. To dream of the backbone,
signifies health and much joy. To see your back denotes misfortune. 2,
19, 42.

BACKGAMMON. (_See Dice._)

BACON. To dream of bacon or pork, denotes the death of some friend or
relation, and that enemies will endeavor to do you a mischief; in love,
it denotes a disappointment of some kind. 74.

BAGPIPES. To dream of bagpipes, signifies trouble, contention, and loss
of a lawsuit. 20, 1.

BAKING. (_See Oven._) For a woman to dream she is baking bread,
foretells thrift. If she is a farmer’s wife, it is a sign of good
crops. If she burns her bread it is a sign that she will have a
miscarriage. 18, 54.

BALL. (_See Dancing._) If you dream you are at a ball, and are dancing
with a lady, it is a sign you will marry her; if you dream that she is
gone, and you are looking round to find her and cannot, it foretells
that she will not live long after marriage. Dreaming of playing ball,
or seeing it played, foretells the speedy receipt of money; to see the
ball roll about, signifies delay in its reception. 54, 11, 55.

BALLOON. Signifies you will undertake many visionary things in
business, and success will not attend you. 46.

BANANA. To dream of this delicious fruit is a good omen; if you dream
you are eating a banana, it is a sign you will be rich and happy. To
dream you see bananas growing denotes success in love matters. If a
girl dreams that her lover presents her with a ripe banana it foretells
she will soon be married, or ought to be. 4, 11, 44.

BANK. If you dream you go to a large bank, and have money there, it is
a sign that you will be poor at some future period of your life. 5, 78.

BANK-BILLS. (_See Money._)

BANKRUPT. A bad dream, your business is in a dangerous position, and
without great care you will be forced to stop. 17, 60, 46.

BARBER. To dream of a barber, denotes losses. 55.

BARN. If you dream that you are in a barn that is well stored with hay
and grain, it predicts that you will marry rich, or else inherit land.
If the barn be empty, it will be the reverse of this, or else you will
meet with a loss. 4, 75.

BARKING DOGS. Is a sign you have enemies who will detract, and insult
you. 17, 61.

BARRELS. Signify wealth if they appear full; if empty, poverty. 14, 1,
7.

BASIN. If you dream that it is full money; if empty, you will make many
debts. 2, 13, 69.

BATH, or BATHING. To dream you are at a bath where you see people
bathing, is a sign you will have good luck in some undertaking. If you
are in, bathing yourself, it predicts that you will confer a benefit
on some person who will be very grateful. This dream also foretells a
change of residence. 20, 31.

BAT. To dream of a bat, or bats, is a sign you will go on a bootless
journey, or one that is not satisfactory. 42.

BATTLE. If you dream you are engaged in a battle, or see a battle, it
is a sign that you will soon undertake some new enterprise, and will
leave off the business or calling in which you are then engaged; it
also predicts to a girl that she will meet a young man in whom she is
much interested; to a soldier it foretells that he will be advanced in
rank. 14.

BAYONET. To dream of a bayonet indicates that you have vindictive
enemies. 64, 7.

BEAM. This signifies you will attain a high position in life. 9.

BEANS. To dream of eating beans is a sign of trouble. If you are
picking beans, it denotes poverty. 72, 18, 11.

BEAR. To dream of seeing a bear, or bears, is a sign you have one or
more enemies; if a bear attacks you, it predicts that you will overcome
your enemy. 68.

BEARD. To dream you have a very little beard, signifies suits at law;
if it is a long thick beard, the dream is a good one, for it shows
success; for a person to dream of his beard falling out, he will lose
some near relative, or will come to disgrace. 47, 3.

BEATING. For married people to dream of beating some one, shows that
they will live a peaceful life; to bachelors, good fortune in their
amours; if a lover beats his mistress, or a lady her suitor, it shows
that the match will be broken off. 5.

BED. To dream that you are lying in bed, signifies that you are in
danger; being in bed and not able to sleep, sickness; to see a stranger
in your bed, brings quarrels in married life; a well-made bed, shows
that you will become established in life. 63, 9.

BED-BUGS. Denote strife, and quarrels. 2, 10.

BEER. To dream you are drinking beer, is a sure sign of domestic
troubles. 6, 8.

BEES. (_See Sting._) It is good and lucky to dream of bees; to a
farmer it predicts good crops; to a lover, excellent success with his
sweetheart; to a maid it promises a good and wealthy husband. 17, 62, 4.

BEGGARS. To dream that a beggar annoys you, is a sign of misfortune, or
some piece of bad luck. To a young girl who has a suitor, it predicts
that if she marries him she will be poor. 26.

BEHEADING. To dream that you see a person that is going to be beheaded,
or if you see one beheaded, it is an excellent sign; in love you will
be successful; in prison you will be released; and any trouble you have
will soon vanish; it is also a sign you will soon meet a long absent
friend who will be glad to see you. 74, 19, 10.

BELLS. To dream that you hear bells ringing merrily is a sign of a
wedding, or else that you will soon hear some good news. If the bell
tolls solemnly, it foretells a funeral or bad news. To a girl, the
tolling of a bell predicts that some one will deceive her. 16.

BELLY. To dream one’s belly is bigger and fuller than ordinary, shows
his family and estate will increase; if one dreams his belly is grown
lean and shrunk up, he will be joyfully delivered of some bad accident;
if any one dreams that his belly is swelled, and yet notwithstanding be
empty, he will become poor; if a girl dreams of a big belly, it is a
sign of marriage. 24, 77.

BET. To dream that you bet with any one, shows that you will suffer
from your own imprudence. 66, 12, 72.

BIRDS. To dream of birds is much better for the rich than the poor; to
dream of little birds, the contrary; to dream that you hear birds chirp
is a good sign; to see birds fighting, signifies adversity; to see
birds fly over your head, signifies prejudice by enemies. 14, 77.

BIRDS’ NESTS. To dream that you find one is a good sign; to dream that
you find one without either eggs or birds, shows you will meet with
great disappointment. 64.

BIRTH. (_See Still-born._) To dream of a birth is good for a poor man;
to the sick it denotes death. 18, 42.

BITE. To dream that you are bitten, foretells much jealousy and sorrow.
15, 19.

BLASPHEMY. If you dream that you are cursing, it foretells bad fortune;
if you are cursed, all your expectations will be fulfilled. 4, 72.

BLEEDING. (_See Fingers._) To dream of bleeding at the nose signifies
loss of goods, and decay of riches; to a young girl it foretells the
loss of her lover. 75, 19, 5.

BLIND. (_See Eye._) To dream of being blind shows that you are deceived
in a supposed friend; this dream also threatens the dreamer with want
of money; to a lover, it predicts that his sweetheart is untrue to him;
this dream also foretells death. 66.

BLOOD. To dream you vomit blood, is good for him that is poor, for he
shall soon get a sum of money. It is also very good for him that has
no children, and whose kindred are in a strange country; the first
shall see a child of his own; the other will hear favorable news of his
kindred, or see them returning home. 11, 19.

BLOSSOMS. If you dream you see trees or plants in blossom, it predicts
that you will get some money, or some article that you little expected.
It also signifies that you will be pleased at something that will soon
happen. 43, 14, 7.

BOAT. (_See Oar, and Rudder._) To dream you are sailing in a boat
in pleasant weather, and enjoying yourself, denotes good success
in business; to lovers it foretells happiness; if the weather is
boisterous, it predicts quarrels, which will be speedily settled;
dreams of sailing smoothly in boats are emphatically good ones to all
kinds of people. 71, 10.

  To dream of being in a boat,
  Does show that maidens’ fancies float;
  And whether sink or swim they do,
  To try love’s sport their skill they’ll show.

BOOKS. To be reading serious books, shows honor and station in life; to
read lascivious books, shame and disgrace. 4.

BOOTS. (_See Shoes._) To dream of new boots and shoes, indicates
sweethearts to the single, and friends to the married; old shoes or
boots show separation, and dirty or old ones are a sign of poverty and
sorrow. 33.

BOTTLES. To dream of bottles is a good sign; to a man, success in
business; to a maid, speedy marriage; if they are broken, they signify
sorrow. 56, 34.

BOUQUET. To receive one, much pleasure; to give one, signifies that
your lover is constant. 43, 7.

BOY. If a lady dreams that she is delivered of a boy, her life will be
a pleasant one. 52.

BREAD. (_See Thick._) To dream of bread is an excellent sign. If you
see a good deal, the better the dream. It foretells good fortune to
either man or woman. To lovers it predicts that they will make a good
match and be well off, if not rich. To farmers it promises full and
abundant crops. 1, 15.

BREAKFAST. To dream that you are eating breakfast shows you will do
something of which you will be sorry. 21, 4.

BRASS. (_See Metals._)

BREAST. (_See Milk._) To dream of breasts, denotes great gain and
profit to men; but to a woman, losses. If a young woman dreams that her
breasts are full of milk, it signifies she is near her marriage. 76, 1,
10.

BREWING. To dream of brewing is a sign you should be up and doing; in
love, it denotes idleness in your sweetheart; if in trade, you will
sustain losses. 31.

  To dream of brewing and of baking,
  Does signify a match is making,
  Between a maiden and some other,
  Both by her father and her mother.

BRIDGE. To dream you are crossing over a bridge, denotes prosperity in
life, and success in love; but to dream you are passing under a bridge,
indicates difficulties in life, both in love and business; if you meet
with obstructions, either on or under the bridge, it foretells illness.
To dream a bridge breaks down with you, denotes sudden death. 56, 2.

BRIARS. To dream that you are among briars and get pricked, foretells
that you will have an angry dispute with somebody. If a young girl who
has a lover dreams it, she will probably get vexed at him. 39, 78.

BROTH. To dream of eating broths, or soups, is a good sign, and denotes
profit and gain. 32, 9.

BROTHERS. To dream you see your brothers and sisters, signifies long
life to the dreamer, but it portends a death in your family. 24, 8.

BUILDING. To dream of seeing a large building is a sign that you will
be introduced to some one with whom you will afterward become intimate.
To a young lady it predicts that she will have a new admirer. 17, 25, 1.

BULL. To dream that you have been gored, or received some hurt from
a bull, shows you are likely to receive some harm from a great man.
To dream you are pursued by a bull, denotes loss of friends and ill
reports; if in love, your sweetheart will be in danger, and you will
narrowly escape some misfortune. 64, 7.

BURNING. (_See Fire._) To see, in your dream, one or more houses
burning, but not wholly destroyed, signifies, for the poor, that
they will become rich, and for the rich man, that his riches will
be augmented; but if the fire is furious, and the houses fall down,
the dreamer may expect losses, disappointments, shame, and death. To
dream you burn yourself is a sign the malice of a stupid enemy will be
foiled. Play your age first.

BURIED ALIVE. To dream that you are buried alive denotes that you will
be rich and powerful. To wealthy people it is a sign of addition to
their wealth. 11, 14.

BUSINESS. To dream of being full of business, is significant of some
unexpected good fortune; to finish it, marriage; if the business
appears to be bad, it is a good sign. 41.

BUTCHER. If, in your dream, you see a butcher killing any animal, it is
a sign of the death of a friend or near relative. If a farmer dreams of
seeing sheep killed, he will probably have a prolific flock. 73, 33, 16.

BUTTER. If you eat it, you will be surprised by some good fortune, but
mixed with sadness. 11, 7.

BUTTERMILK. Losses from an extension of business. To the sick it is a
sign of speedy convalescence. 71.

BUTTERFLIES. To dream you see gaudy butterflies, portends much
happiness and luxury. 46, 18.

BUYING. To dream you buy all sorts of things that one uses, is good; to
buy that which is only for victuals and relief, is good for the poor;
but to the rich it signifies expenses and great charges. 19, 2, 69.

CABBAGE. To dream of cabbage, signifies very bad news from abroad. 16.

CAGE. To dream of letting birds out of a cage, is a sign that you will
lose something. If a young girl dreams this, it predicts a loss of her
chastity. 36, 5.

CAKES. (_See Thick._) If a housewife dreams of making round cakes, it
predicts that her husband will have a good store of luck and will make
her a present. To dream of eating cakes, is also a favorable dream. 18,
78.

CALF. To dream of a calf, is a sign of good luck. 14, 1.

CALIFORNIA. If you dream of going there, it predicts to you a
misfortune; but if, in your dream, you imagine you are in California,
and that it is a pleasant country, it foretells that you will receive
a valuable present, or a legacy, or else that you will draw a prize in
the lottery. 71, 10, 6.

CANDLES. To dream of lighted candles, is a sign that you will become
religious, or will be soon visited by a minister who will tell you good
news. To see a candle extinguished, is a sign of a funeral. To light a
candle, success in what you undertake. 21, 67, 46.

CANNON. Beware of treacherous friends. To dream you hear a cannon, is a
sign of sickness or death. 57.

CANNON BALL. To see a cannon ball, denotes misfortune. 6, 2.

CANDY. To dream of candy, is a sign of domestic tranquillity. 47, 8.

CANCER. (_See Abscess._)

CANE. To dream of a cane, is considered a most inauspicious dream; and
some authors forbid the dreamer to undertake any business on that day.
24, 2.

CAP. To put one on, be careful in your love affairs; to take one down,
shows that that which you wish to hide will be discovered; if you
receive a cap you will soon be married. 64, 38.

CARDS. Playing at cards, dice, or any other game in a dream, shows
the party will be fortunate in love affairs; for the tables and cards
allude to love. 76, 17.

CARROTS. To dream of carrots, or parsnips, signifies profit and
strength to those who are at law for an inheritance. 10, 35.

CARRIAGE. To dream you ride in a carriage, is a sign of success in
business and love. If the carriage breaks down, it is a sign you will
meet with sudden losses. 31, 67, 3.

CARRYING. To dream that one is carrying another, is better than to
dream one is carried; to be carried by a woman, a child, or a poor
person, means profit and success; by a rich person, the contrary. 4,
44, 1.

CART. To dream of being tied to a cart to draw like a horse, denotes
servitude and pain; but to dream that you are carried in a cart, the
contrary. 6, 5, 17.

CASH. (_See Money._)

CATS. To see cats is hidden enmity; to be bitten by them, denotes
misfortune; to be scratched, care and trouble; to caress them, false
friends; to kill one is triumph over your enemies; to dream of cats is
also a sign of loss by thieves. 54, 42, 16.

CATERPILLARS. To dream you see caterpillars, denotes misfortune by
secret enemies. 71, 77.

CATTLE. (See _Pasture, Pound, and Yoke_.) To dream you see cattle
feeding, denotes great prosperity, and unexpected success; to a lover,
it foretells a happy marriage, with many children; and to a married
man, it shows that his wife will receive some unexpected legacy; to
dream you are driving cattle, denotes that you will become rich by
industry; if you see fat cattle, it denotes a plentiful year; if you
see lean and hungry cattle in your dream, it denotes scarcity and
famine. 6, 11, 66.

CAVERN, OR CAVE. (See _Grotto_.)

CELLAR. To dream you are in a cellar, is a sign of sickness and an
unlucky law suit. 75, 2.

CELLERY. To dream of cellery is a good omen, it portends success in
business and love. 48, 1.

CHAIN. If you dream of gold chains it is a sign of a wedding; if a
girl dreams she is presented with one, it is a sure sign of a speedy
marriage. Such a dream to a man in business predicts that he will be
prevented from doing something that he specially desires to do. 15, 11.

CHAIR. To dream you are sitting on a chair, is a sign you will soon
have an increase in your family; if a maiden has this dream it is a
sign she soon will be married. To dream you are sitting in a rocking
chair, denotes you will very soon better your condition. 25.

CHARITY. For a rich person to dream that he is charitable, signifies
loss of fortune; if a lady dreams it, she will bestow her affections on
an unworthy person. 17, 42, 5.

CHEESE. To dream you eat cheese, signifies profit and gain in trade; in
love, deceit. 65, 3.

CHEMISE. (See _Smock and Shifts_.)

CHESS. To play at, denotes gain by lying and deceit; to see another
play, loss by craftiness. Anselmus Julianus regarded this dream
as indicative of the success which would attend the dreamer in his
undertaking, according to his fancied success in his dream. 8, 78.

CHESTNUTS. To dream you are eating raw chestnuts, shows you will be
fortunate in love affairs. Boiled chestnuts, signifies you will be
fortunate in business. To dream you prick your hand with a chestnut
burr, is a sign your confidence will be abused by a pretended friend.
7, 18.

CHERRIES. To dream of ripe cherries foretells that you will hear good
news, or that some one will do you a favor. After such a dream you can
easily borrow money if you wish to. If the cherries are green or mixed,
your news will be a mixture of good and bad. 14, 54.

CHICKEN. To dream of a hen, or chicken, signifies losses in trade, and
deceit in love. 19.

CHILD. (_See Boy._) Dreaming of children is a good omen. If a Woman
dreams she is about to have a child, it foretells a rich legacy or
other good fortune: if she is a maid that has this dream, she must be
on her guard, or she will lose her virtue. 5, 56.

CHIMNEY. To dream of sitting in the chimney corner, to a maid, shows
speedy marriage; if there is a fire burning brightly, you will become
heir to some money. 61.

CHOCOLATE. To dream of chocolate, signifies trouble, brought about by
gossiping. 47, 15.

CHRISTENING. To dream that you are present at a christening, is a good
sign, you will get what you hope for; to a maid, it signifies that she
will soon be married. 70, 50, 1.

CHURCH. To dream one is at church, and praying there, signifies joy and
comfort. To dream of singing in church, is a dream of bad consequence.
13, 6.

CHURCHYARD. To dream of a churchyard, is a sign you will have a long
and happy life. 76.

CLAMS. To a lover, this dream is a sign he will be successful with his
sweetheart; if the clams are large, it signifies he will get through
the world easy, but if they are small he may get into difficulties, and
be caught in a tight place. 49, 24.

CLIMB. If you dream of climbing, it is a sign you will have some
dignity conferred upon you, or that your circumstances in life will
improve. To unmarried people it predicts that they will marry above
their station. 4, 19.

CLOCK. To dream you hear the clock strike, denotes speedy marriage; if
you dream the clock falls or breaks, it denotes danger. To dream of
counting the hours of the forenoon, is lucky; the afternoon, unlucky.
72, 3, 12.

CLOUDS. To dream of white clouds, signifies prosperity, clouds mounting
high from the earth, denotes voyages, the return of the absent, and
revealing of secrets; clouds red and inflamed, show an ill-issue of
affairs; dark and obscure clouds, obstructions in love 47, 8.

CLOTHING. (_See Apparel._)

COAL. To dream you see dead coal, signifies expedition in business; but
to dream you see burning coal, threatens you with shame and reproach.
12.

COACH. (_See Carriage._)

COCK. (_See Rooster._) To dream you see a cock in the house, is a
good sign to those who would marry; to hear a cock crow denotes great
prosperity. 19, 10.

COFFEE. To dream of coffee, signifies loss of reputation. For a young
girl to have such a dream, predicts the loss of her virtue. 39, 17.

COFFIN. To dream of one, denotes the death of a friend, or some near
relation. 74, 6.

COMEDY. To dream you see a comedy, or farce, is a good omen. To the
business man it betokens success, and to the maiden a speedy marriage
to the one she loves. 22.

CONCERT. To dream of being at a concert, foretells the enjoyment of
good health; to the sick, recovery. 12, 22.

COMMAND. To dream you command any one, shows trouble; to dream you see
one command, signifies anger and authority. 14, 62, 7.

COOK. To dream you see a cook in the house, is good to those who would
marry, and to the poor; but it is also the revealing of secrets; to
dream of cooking, is also a sign of a wedding. 6, 34.

COPPER. (_See Metals._)

CORN. To dream that you see corn eared, and gather it, signifies profit
and riches; to dream that you see stacks of corn, signifies wealth and
abundance to the dreamer; and on the contrary, to see a small quantity,
denotes poverty. 69.

CORNS. For a man to dream his flesh is full of corns, shows he will
grow rich proportionably to his corns. 70, 12.

CORPSE. (_See Shroud._) To dream you see a corpse, is a sign of long
life. 39, 11.

  Dreams of rivers, ships and horses,
  Of snow and frost, and of dead corpses,
  Are signs by which it may be read,
  Your sweetheart’s love is cold or dead.

COWS. If you dream of seeing large herds of cows, it predicts
prosperity and wealth. To see one cow in your dream is a sign of a good
piece of luck of some kind. If a young girl dreams of cows, it is a
sign she will marry a rich man, and have numerous children. 4, 26, 1.

CRABS, signify you will quarrel with a friend. To the married, this
dream is a sign of separation. 49, 19.

CRIMINAL. (_See Reprieve._) To dream that you are a criminal, shows
that disgrace and danger are in store for you. 9, 61.

CRADLE. To dream you are rocking a cradle, is a good omen, and
signifies a long and prosperous life. To the married, it is a sign of
domestic happiness, and to the single a sign of speedy marriage with
the object of their affection. To dream you upset a cradle, portends
sickness or a loss in business. 46, 5.

CROCODILE. (_See Reptile._) To dream of a crocodile, signifies pirates
or robbers by sea, or deceitful persons, and troubles. 18, 2.

CROSS. To dream you see a cross, signifies sadness. 68.

CROW. A crow indicates expedition in business, adultery, or a thief; if
croaking, an ill omen; if it flies on to the head of a child, the child
will be in great danger of a misfortune. 74, 6.

CROWN. To dream a golden crown is placed upon your head, foretells that
success and great honor await you; if the crown be silver, you will
enjoy good health; if crowned with green leaves, friends and fortune
will forsake you. 52, 6, 13.

CRYING. (_See Weeping._)

CRUTCHES. If you dream you use them, your love will forsake you; if you
only see them, some infirmity will press upon you; if you break them,
you will recover from sickness. 46, 19.

CUCUMBERS. To dream of these vegetables, signifies that your business
will not be very prosperous; for a sick person to dream of them,
foretells a speedy recovery. 16, 8.

CURRANTS. Red currants denote happiness in life, and success in love.
White currants portend that your partner will fall into difficulties,
and will have a long illness. 12, 5, 60.

DAGGER. To dream of a dagger, you may expect news of absent persons,
and your dearest hope will be fulfilled. 9.

DAHLIA. To dream of these flowers, is a sign of thrift. If a lady
dreams of them, it foretells that her husband will make money rapidly.
To a young girl, it predicts the same of her lover. 19, 20, 12.

DAIRY. To dream you are in a dairy, busy at work, is a very favorable
omen; to the maid it indicates that her lover will be of an industrious
turn and will rise to honor. To the farmer, it denotes that his crops
will be abundant; to the tradesman, good news. 71, 2.

DANCING. (_See Ball._) To dream you are dancing at a ball or
entertainment, foretells that you will shortly receive joyful news;
it also foretells success and happiness in love. To see others dance
there, signifies pleasure and an inheritance. 55, 27.

DANGER. To dream of being in danger, shows success in life; to shun it,
misfortune. (_See Difficulty._) 27, 17.

DARKNESS. To dream you are in a dark place, is an unfavorable omen;
to the lovers it denotes, loss of sweethearts, to the trader, loss of
goods; but to dream of getting out of darkness into light, is good; if
you are in poverty, it foretells riches; if in love, a happy marriage.
4, 16.

DATES. Dates denote many enemies, and you will receive much injury by a
person you little expect. 6, 44.

DAY. To dream of a clear, sunshiny day, portends long life and
happiness, but to dream of a dark, cloudy, and stormy day, is an
unlucky omen. 3, 33, 9.

DAYBREAK. Good fortune in every thing you undertake. 64, 7.

DEATH. To dream you see death, denotes happiness and long life; that
you will be either speedily married yourself, or assist at a wedding.
To dream you see another person dead, denotes hasty news from friends.
61, 4.

DEBT. To dream of paying a debt with money, foretells that you will
soon receive some. If you imagine that you owe a debt, and are worrying
to get the money to pay, it is a sign of sickness. 18, 64.

DEEDS. To sign your name to deeds, is a bad sign; to a man, loss in
business; to a woman, the inconstancy of her lover. 7, 8.

DEER. If you see these animals in your dream, it shows that you will
hear some unexpected news—no matter what—perhaps a marriage, a death,
an accident, or a legacy has been left to you; or that some one is in
love with you. 12.

DEVIL. To dream of this enemy to the human race, denotes that many
dangers threaten you, all of which you will overcome if you carefully
withstand all temptations to do evil; in love it forebodes loss of the
affections; in trade, opposition; to dream you are pursued by an evil
spirit, is also a bad omen. 61, 18.

DIAMONDS. To dream you wear a diamond, denotes that you will be crossed
in love, and that your lover is unfaithful. For a man of business to
dream that he is dealing in diamonds, is good, it is a sure thing with
him, that he will become wealthy, and retire to private life much
respected. 33, 3.

DICE. To dream you are playing at dice, backgammon, or draughts,
denotes much good to the dreamer, in either love, marriage, or
business. To a young girl, engaged to be married, dreaming of dice
foretells that her lover will be wild and not of much account. 54.

DIFFICULTY. If you imagine in your dream that you are in great
difficulty, or in personal danger of any kind, it is a favorable sign,
as such dreams always go by contrary. 17, 27.

DIGGING. To dream of digging in clean and healthy ground, is a sign
of thrift, and good luck generally: if the ground be dirty or wet, it
shows trouble: if you are digging for gold, and find large and rich
lumps, it shows you’ll have some good luck, but if the product is
meagre, or if you don’t find any, it foretells disappointment. If you
lose any of your tools it is a sign of a quarrel. 14, 71.

DINNER. If you dream of sitting down to dinner with a large company, it
is a sign you will either go a journey, or change the present location
either of your dwelling or business. 76, 11.

DIRT. To dream of dirty dirt or mud, signifies that some one will speak
ill of you. If it is clean sand or soil, and you do not get befouled
with it, it is a sign of thrift and good fortune. If some one throws
dirt on you, it foretells that you will be abused. 22, 41.

DISEASE. If you dream you have any contagious or foul disease on you,
it foretells luck and benefit, as such a dream goes by contrary. 18, 2.

DITCHES. To dream of ditches, steep mountains, rocks, and other
eminences, foretells danger and misfortune: expect thieves to rob your
dwelling, or that your children will be undutiful, and bring you into
trouble; if you are in love, it foretells unhappiness if you marry
your present sweetheart: if you are in trade, it denotes loss of goods,
and other trouble: to farmers, it foretells accidents to their live
stock, loss of sheep, &c. 73, 8.

DOGS. (_See Mad Dog._) To dream of those animals, has very different
significations; if they fawn and fondle upon you, it is a lucky omen;
if you are in love, it portends marriage and happiness; but if they
bark and snarl at you, it denotes that enemies are endeavoring to
destroy your reputation and happiness; if in love, crosses. 17, 61.

DOLL. If a girl dreams she has a new doll with which she is greatly
pleased, it foretells a disappointment. 61.

DOLPHINS. To dream of seeing these beautiful fishes playing in the
water, denotes the death of some dear friend or relative. 5, 4.

DOMESTICS. (_See Servants._) To dream of having a great number of
servants, is illness. 71, 11.

DOORS. To dream you knock at a door, and gain admittance, shows
success in your undertakings; if you cannot obtain entrance, it shows
disappointment. 16, 9.

DOVE. To dream you see these emblems of love, denotes good fortune to
the dreamer. 36.

DROWNING. (_See Water and Resuscitate._) To dream you are drowning,
or that you see another drowned, portends good to the dreamer; to the
lover, good-tempered sweethearts and marriage; but to a girl it is a
sign she should keep an eye on her lover. 54, 18, 1.

DREAMS. (_See Sleep._) To dream you relate your dreams to any one,
shows something unlooked for will take place. 41, 18.

DROUGHT. For a farmer or planter to dream of seeing his grass or crops
drying up for want of rain, denotes that an accident will happen to him
or his property during a storm, or that some of his live stock will die
or meet an accident. 12.

DRINK. To dream you drink cold water, is good to all; hot, sickness and
hindrance; wine, is good; sweet wine, success in love; oil, sickness;
from vessels of gold, or silver, or earthenware, intends tranquillity;
of horn, implies good; glass, evil. 67.

  If maids do dream of drawing drink
  In cellars, they may waking think,
  That their sweethearts without delay,
  Will leave them, and soon run away.

DRUM. To dream you hear the rolling of a drum signifies that you will
be called away from your home or business unexpectedly. If you see
soldiers marching when you hear the drum, it shows that though you may
not have to leave, yet you will receive an unexpected message that will
cause you trouble or excitement. 49.

DRUNKENNESS. To dream you are drunk, is loss in business; but success
in love; to a woman, it denotes she will be beloved by a stranger; and
to a man that he will be married to a rich young widow. To the married
it denotes domestic bliss. To see a drunken man, shows that you will be
guilty of some foolish action. 18, 20.

DUCK. To hear ducks quacking, or to see these fowls in your dream,
denotes that somebody is coming to see you who is hungry, or that you
will shortly have a visitor in your family who will stop to dinner. 73,
1.

DUET. To dream you sing a duet with a lady shows that you can win her
if you desire. To dream you sing with a man shows you have a secret
but powerful enemy, and is a sign you will never marry. To hear a duet
denotes business troubles. 50, 51.

DUMB. If you dream that you are dumb, or that any of your speaking
friends are so afflicted, it foretells sickness or misfortune. But
should you dream that a deaf mute of your acquaintance speaks, it
foretells joy and gladness at something that will happen. 14.

DUN. If you are troubled in your dreams by imagining that people
are dunning you for money, it is a sure sign you will get some
unexpectedly. 41.

DUST. If you dream you are in a room or in the road where the dust is
flying so as to choke you, it shows that some one is plotting to injure
you in some way or to make a speculation out of you. 64, 2.

DWARF. Should a single lady dream she sees a very small man or Dwarf,
it indicates that her husband will be a very large man, or have a great
intellect. If a single man has this dream it is a sign he will marry a
scold. For married people to dream of dwarfs shows that their children
will give them much trouble.

EAGLES. To dream you see an eagle soaring very high in the air, denotes
prosperity, riches and honors: to the lover, it foretells success in
love and marriage. 48.

EARS. To dream of boring many ears denotes obedience and readiness;
to dream of cleansing them, good news; of having your ears boxed, ill
news; of having large ears, prosperity and honor; of being hurt or
slit, offence and treachery; of loss of ears, loss of friendship; of
loss of hearing, betrayal of secrets; and to a woman, ruin. 3, 19.

EAR-RINGS. To dream of purchasing a pair of ear-rings is a good dream
to the fair sex; to widows and maids they signify marriage; to those
that have no children, that they shall have children; and to those that
have husbands and children, purchases and riches; for as women are
provided with these deckings, so shall they be stored with husbands,
children, and goods. 32.

EARTHQUAKES. Change of estate, injuries, death; to see a town destroyed
by, famine, war, and desolation. 17.

EATING. If you dream of eating a good meal with a relish, it foretells
good crops to a farmer, and successful business to any one. 70, 14.

ECLIPSE. For one to dream he sees the sun in eclipse, signifies the
loss of his father; if he sees the moon eclipsed, it denotes the death
of his mother; but if he has neither father nor mother, then it denotes
the death of a relation. 8.

EELS. To dream of catching or handling eels, denotes that you will have
good fortune, but difficulty. If the eels slip through your hands and
escape from you, it shows that you will experience a loss. 41, 6.

EGGS. (_See Rotten._) If married people dream of eggs it is a sign they
will be prolific of children. If a newly married lady dreams of finding
a nest full of eggs, it foretells that her first born will be twins
or triplets. If a young girl dreams such a dream, it is a sign that
she will soon be married, or get in a condition that she ought to be a
wife. 4, 47.

ELDERBERRIES. To dream of elderberries augurs content and riches: to
a maiden they bespeak a speedy marriage; to a married woman, that she
will shortly be with child; to the tradesman, success in business; to
the farmer, good crops. 30, 33.

ELEPHANT. To dream of an elephant is a very fortunate dream, for it
denotes an acquirement of riches: if you are in love, it foretells a
speedy marriage with your sweetheart, and many children, chiefly boys,
who will distinguish themselves by their learning. 33.

ELOPEMENT. For a young girl to dream she elopes with her beau, is
a sign her parents will give their consent and she will soon be
married to the one she loves. If a man dreams that he elopes with his
sweetheart, it portends that he will be  “_cut out_” by a stranger. 4,
44, 8.

ENEMY. If you dream that some one is trying to injure you, or that
a person who you know is your enemy endeavors to work to your
disadvantage, it foretells good fortune and success. Such dreams always
go by contrary, and you may calculate a benefit just in proportion to
the injury you dream you are about to sustain. 69, 78.

ENTRAILS. This is a good dream for the poor, but to the rich it
portends loss of riches. To sweethearts and beaus it shows that they
will be happy in their loves. 10, 20.

EMBRACE. To dream of embracing relatives is a warning of treachery; if
friends, disappointments; if one unknown embrace you, you will travel;
the embrace of a woman brings good luck. 3, 11, 33.

ERRAND. To dream that you are sent of an errand, signifies great loss
to the married; to the lover it denotes success in his pursuits, and
that he will shortly marry a very amiable and accomplished maiden. 39.

EXECUTION. (_See Hanged and Gallows._) To dream of seeing a man hanged
denotes that some friend or relative will shortly come to good fortune.
If you dream that you yourself are going to be hanged, you may safely
calculate on good luck for that year: if you are in business you will
be successful. 7, 6, 10.

EYE. (_See Squinting and Blind._) If you dream you see a person with
a defective eye, it denotes disappointment: to see a glaring squint
eye in your dream, shows that you will be defeated or crossed in some
enterprise. To dream that your own eyes are defective, or squint, is a
sure sign of bad luck: sore eyes denote sickness: blindness, death, or
deception. 66, 49, 78.

EYEBROWS. Thick eyebrows are a sign of friends; thin, ill-will and
vexation; black, good luck. 18.

FACE. To dream that your face is swelled, indicates an augmentation
of wealth and honor; but if it grows pale or emaciated, you will be
severely disappointed. Of a fresh smiling face, friendship and joy;
black face, long life; washing, repentance. 5, 11, 55.

FACTION OR SEDITION. Denotes health, and trouble, and shame. 16, 10.

FAINTING. To dream you see a person fainting indicates that you will
soon hear of the death of a dear friend. 64.

FAIR. To dream you are at a fair, is a bad omen; it denotes that some
pretended friend is about to do you an injury; if you are in trade,
keep a keen look out, for some swindler will certainly attempt to
defraud you. 31, 15.

FAIRY. If you dream of seeing a fairy, you will meet a woman, who will
seduce you from the path of propriety, and make your life vexatious. 2,
22.

  To dream of blust’ring storms of wind,
  Does show inconstancy of mind;
  But if you dream of elves and fairies,
  Beware the girls and night-vagaries.

FALL. To dream you are falling from an eminence, shows you will have
some dignity conferred upon you, or else will marry above your sphere.
If a young girl dreams this, it is a sign she will marry a rich
husband. 65, 70.

FAMILY. If a man or woman dreams that they have a large family, it is a
sign of thrift and riches. Such a dream is a lucky one to anybody. 18,
41.

FAMINE. If a farmer dreams that his crops have failed, or of any
scarcity of food, it shows that there will be a quarrel, which, though
it may not be among his people, yet he will witness or hear about it,
and it will worry him. 34, 8, 26.

FAN. To dream you see your sweetheart fanning herself, signifies that
a stranger will step in some fine day and  “cut you out.” If a maid
dreams that her beau presents her with a fan, or offers to fan her, it
is a sign he will attempt to take improper liberties with her. 41, 18.

FAREWELL. To say farewell, or to hear another say it, is a bad sign,
you will hear painful news. 45, 9.

FARM. (_See Land._) If a man dreams he has a good farm, well enclosed,
with pleasant pastures, bestowed upon him, he will have a handsome
wife; but if the land seems spacious, and not enclosed, that denotes
pleasure, joy, and riches. To dream you are working on a farm, denotes
you will soon receive a legacy from a distant relative. 42.

FAST. (_See Hungry._) To dream of fasting, or going without food until
you are very hungry, is a sign of a quarrel; but it foretells success
in love and business. 29, 7.

FAT. To dream you are growing fat, if you are a married woman,
signifies you will soon have a son; to a maiden, it signifies she will
soon be engaged; to men, it is a sign of success in business. To dream
you are cutting or eating fat, portends sickness and misfortune. 66, 3.

FATHER. To dream you see your father, is fortunate; to see him die, is
unlucky and portends sickness. 28.

FATIGUE. To dream you are very much fatigued, portends that you will be
successful in business, but it is a sign of sickness. 4, 78.

FAULT. If you dream you commit a fault, be very careful in your
conduct; if you see a fault in a lady who is very dear to you, should
you trust her, she will be faithful to you in every thing. 22, 13, 27.

FAVOR. If you dream that you ask a favor of a friend, and he grants it,
it foretells that he has been talking about you; but if he refuses it,
it shows that some other person has spoken ill of you to him. 16, 71.

FEAR. To feel fear, signifies that you will be courageous in your
waking moments; to dream of frightening others, shows that your courage
is weak. 68.

FEAST. If you dream of feasting at a friend’s house, or eating with him
anywhere, it shows you will make a new acquaintance through his means.
If a girl dreams this, it is a sign she will soon have a lover from
that very house or place where she dreams of feasting. 76, 18.

FEET. (_See Corns._) To dream of washing your feet, denotes trouble of
some kind; of scratching or tickling the soles of your feet, shows that
you will be flattered by some one to your disadvantage; dreaming of
dirty feet predicts sickness or trouble; if, in your dream, you imagine
your feet are covered with corns, you will have great riches. 51.

FESTER. Dreaming that you have a fester on your hand, or fingers, is a
sign that you will give somebody a present; if on your feet, or legs,
it shows you will go to see some one who will be glad to see you. 76,
14.

FIDDLE. If you dream that you are playing on a fiddle, or hearing the
music of one, it is a sign you will soon attend a funeral. Such a dream
is a bad omen to girls, as it points to the death of a lover, or of
some dear friend. 61.

FIELDS. (_See Meadow and Green._) To dream you are in a ploughed field,
forebodes some severe disputes that will be brought upon you by some
person who has no children; to dream you are in a meadow covered with
flowers, is a very handsome wife, who will bring you lovely children
and make you very happy; to a woman, it denotes that she will marry a
handsome young fellow, by whom she will have beautiful children, that
they will become rich, and live to a good old age. 16, 72, 6.

FIFE. For a girl to dream she hears the shrill music of a fife, is
a sign she will soon have a beau, and that he will be a smart and
desirable young man. 77, 5.

FIGS. To dream of eating good figs, signifies joy and happiness; if
the figs are mouldy or defective, your pleasure will be marred by some
disagreeable event. 6, 29.

FIGHT. If you dream of being engaged in a fight, it foretells to a man
of business that he will soon engage in some new enterprise that will
be successful; to a laboring man, it predicts increased pay. 44, 78.

FIGURES. Any number above _one_, and below _seventy-eight_, is deemed
to portend good fortune to the dreamer, but _forty-nine_ is the most
lucky. All numbers above _seventy-eight_ are uncertain, except _three
hundred and forty-three_, and that is a very lucky number. 49, 10, 13.

FINGERS. To dream that you cut your fingers, if they bleed, is a very
good omen; you will be successful in love, and your sweetheart will
prove kind and true. 1, 2.

FIRE. (_See Burning._) If in your dream, you see a house on fire other
than your own, it foretells that some event will happen to make you
melancholy and sorrowful, such as the death or ruin of some esteemed
friend. If you dream your own house or place of business is burning, it
is an omen of good fortune. If you dream of playing with fire, it is a
sign of a quarrel in bed. For this dream play your age first. 26.

  To dream of sitting by the fire,
  When it is late, doth show desire;
  But if you sit till the fire’s out,
  Your love will prove false out of doubt.

FIRE-ARMS. (_See Gun, Pistol, and Cannon._)

FISH. To dream of catching fish is a sign of excellent good fortune,
particularly if you haul up large ones; if the fish fall off your
hook, it predicts troublesome fortune. If you dream of fishing without
catching any, it shows that you will fail in some undertaking or
speculation; and to a lover it is a sign that he will get the mitten.
To dream that you see an abundance of fish, foretells the receipt of
money, or success in collecting it. 14, 71.

FLAG. To dream you see a flag waving, betokens great danger from
enemies, or sickness. To dream you carry a flag, signifies you will
receive some mark of distinction from your fellow-citizens. If a
maid dream she is making a flag, it is a sign she will marry a rich
officer in the Army or Navy; but if a married woman has this dream, it
foretells the birth of a son who will become a great general. 13, 35,
61.

FLEAS. To dream you are tormented with these little insects, is of an
unfavorable kind; evil and malicious enemies will do you much injury;
your sweetheart will prove false. 45.

FLIES. To dream of a swarm of flies, denotes that you have many
enemies; it also denotes that your sweetheart is not sincere, and cares
but little about you; to dream you kill them is a very good omen; it
denotes success in love and trade. 21, 49.

FLOOD. (_See Overflow._) To dream of a flood, generally denotes riches
and plenty, particularly if the water is calm, it shows that though you
may lose something, you will be fortunate in other ways sufficient to
counterbalance it. 2, 66, 9.

FLOUR. (_See Mill._) To dream that you buy flour is a bad omen, and
portends sickness, or the death of a near friend. 41.

FLOWERS. (_See Blossom._) To dream you are gathering flowers, is a very
favorable omen: expect to thrive in every thing you undertake, and
that you will be successful in love, marry happily, and have beautiful
children; should the flowers wither under your hands, it foretells
heavy losses in trade; that your sweetheart will die; or if you are
married, that you will lose your husband or wife, or perhaps your
favorite child. 14, 7, 43.

FLUTE. To dream you play or hear playing on a flute, signifies trouble
and contention with your friends. 47, 8.

  If your kind fancy you present
  With playing on an instrument,
  Your sweetheart shall not you disdain,
  But yield true love for love again.

FLYING. To dream you are flying is a very excellent omen; if you are in
love, your sweetheart will be true to you; and if you marry, you will
have many children, who will all do very well and be happy. 35.

FORK. To dream of a fork indicates that a false friend will attempt
your ruin by flattery. 69.

FORTUNE. If you dream that some one told your fortune, you may
calculate every thing will go pretty nearly the reverse of what was
assured to you: if you were promised money you will get poverty, and
_vice versa_. To dream of making a sudden fortune is a sign of want.
All dreams of this kind go by the rule of contrary. 76, 8, 4.

FOUNTAIN. To dream you are at a fountain, is a favorable omen; if the
water is clear, it denotes riches and honors; and in love, it foretells
happiness in marriage; but if muddy, it denotes vexation and trouble.
71, 20, 18.

FOX. A sign of thieves; to dream of fighting with them, shows that
you will have to deal with some cunning enemy; to keep a tame fox,
signifies that you will love a lewd woman, or have a bad servant, who
will rob you. A number of foxes, false friends. 11, 17.

FREE MASON. To dream you are a free mason denotes you will soon make
a number of new friends who will treat you on the square, it also
foretells you will take a journey to the east. If you are already a
member of that celebrated Order, and dream you attend a meeting of the
lodge it portends sickness, and a heavy loss of property, to dream you
are expelled from the Order shows you will attain a higher station in
life. 2, 78.

FROG. If you dream of seeing a large frog, or a number of frogs, or of
hearing frogs croak, it is a good omen as regards your health. To dream
of catching frogs alive, without killing them, foretells some piece
of good fortune; but if you kill them it is a sign some accident will
befall you. 22, 3.

FRUIT. To dream of fruit which is ripe and fair to look upon is an
excellent omen, as it foretells the most perfect success in all worldly
matters: if the fruit is green or defective, it indicates trouble with
your success. If you dream of eating fruit that proves to be sour or
rotten, it shows disappointment: if a young girl dreams this, it is a
sign that her lover will deceive her. 32.

FUNERAL. To dream of attending a funeral shows that you will probably
be soon at a wedding or some gay party. If, in your dream, you see
a funeral pass, it denotes a pleasure party out of doors, such as a
pic-nic or excursion. 18, 1.

FUR. To dream of fur signifies much good; it denotes that your
sweetheart is kind and true, and that if you marry, you will be very
happy; it denotes to the merchant a good establishment in business, to
the sailor a profitable voyage. 61, 78.

GAG. If you dream that your mouth is stopped by a gag, it denotes that
you will soon thereafter be kissed by a pretty girl. To a young girl,
such a dream predicts that she will see some gentleman who takes her
fancy, and perhaps will fall in love with him. 13.

GAIN. If acquired justly, you may hope for wealth; if by injustice, you
will lose your fortune. 33, 14.

GALLOWS. (_See Execution and Hanged._) To dream of a gallows is a
good omen, as it denotes that you will have a chance to make money,
and if you are smart enough to avail yourself of the opportunity, it
will be all right. To those embarking in new enterprises, such a dream
foretells success. 10, 7, 6.

GAMBLING. (_See Raffling._) To dream of gambling is a sign of poverty
and disgrace. If, in your dream, you see others gamble, and do not
engage in it yourself, it shows that some of your friends or relatives
will have a reverse of fortune and become poor. 8, 44.

GARDEN. To see a beautiful and thrifty garden in your dream, denotes
good luck and abundance: if the garden is run to weeds, you may still
have luck, but much trouble and vexation will accompany it: if you see
rats or pigs in the garden, it denotes thieves to annoy you. 31, 17.

GARLIC. For a man to dream he eats garlic, signifies he shall discover
hidden secrets, and meet with some domestic jars; yet to dream he has
it in the house is good. 6, 11, 66.

GARTER. This is a good dream to the lover, as it signifies he will soon
be united to his sweetheart. To the married this dream portends much
domestic trouble from jealousy. 4, 16.

GAS. If you dream of bright and pleasant gas-lights, it shows success
in love matters. If the gas is dim and looks unnatural, your beau or
sweetheart will either leave you, or die. 36.

GEESE. To dream of these birds is generally a good omen: if you
see them quietly feeding it denotes success and pleasure in your
undertakings; but if they are alarmed and cackling, it foretells
trouble and annoyance, but yet nothing that will seriously affect you.
15, 69.

GHOST. (_See Apparition._)

GIANT. If a lady dreams of seeing a very large man, or giant, and if
she is pleased with his appearance, it shows that her future husband
will be a small fellow, or else a man of small intellect: if she is
disgusted with the giant, it is a sign that she will marry such a man
herself, or else a man of great mind. For married people to dream of
giants shows a prospect of smart children. 31, 4.

GIFT. (_See Present._) To dream that a friend presents you with a
valuable gift, predicts that you will lose something. If a girl dreams
that her lover gives her a present, it is a sign that she will allow
him the husband’s privilege before marriage. 64, 21.

GIG. To dream of riding alone in a gig, denotes delay, and that
something you expected to happen will be put off: if you imagine you
ride in a gig with your sweetheart, it foretells that your marriage day
will be postponed, or will be far distant. 46, 1.

GIN. To dream of this liquor is a sign of poverty and disgrace: if you
imagine you are drinking it, it foretells that you will lose money or
property by some foolish act of your own. 74, 78.

GIPSY. If you dream of these wandering vagrants, it foretells that
you will have trouble of some kind—either a vexatious loss, or else
something will happen to worry you: to dream that a gipsy tells your
fortune, shows that some one will rob you. 16, 57.

GLASS. To dream of receiving a glass of water, signifies that you will
soon be married; if you break it, your lover will forsake you. 11, 64.

GLOBE. To dream you are looking at a globe, foretells much good, and
that you will be a great traveller. 19.

GLOVES. To dream of wearing good gloves, brings happiness; if the
gloves are torn, many disappointments. To the lover this dream is a
sign he will get the mitten from his sweetheart. 25, 9.

GOAT. If you dream of seeing goats on a high place in a mountain, it
shows that riches or honors await you: if the goats are merely on the
road, or in a building, it predicts good luck. 64, 34.

GOGGLES. To dream that you are wearing these glasses to protect the
eyes, is a sign that you will see something disagreeable. If a lover
dreams such a dream, he will be apt to see some young fellow making
love, or saying soft things, to his sweetheart. 45, 3.

GOLD. (_See Metals, also Money._) To dream of receiving gold, is a
very good omen: it denotes success in your present undertakings, after
experiencing some little difficulties. If you pay gold, it betokens
increase of friends and business. 49, 7.

GOLD-FISH. To dream of these beautiful fish is a sign of good fortune
generally: if you dream of catching a large one, it foretells that you
will soon get a large sum of money: any kind of a dream about these
fish is lucky. 20, 6.

GOOSEBERRIES. To dream of gooseberries indicate many children, chiefly
sons, and the accomplishment of your present pursuits. To the maiden
they foretell a cheerful husband; they also denote happiness in
marriage, and success in trade. 19, 8.

GOVERNOR. If you dream of seeing the Governor, or chief magistrate of a
State, it foretells that something will soon happen to please you: if
you shake hands with him, and he smiles upon you, the dream is all the
better, as it predicts that you will have honors conferred upon you.
10, 11.

GRAIN. To dream of regular fields of ripe grain is a good omen, as
it is a sign of thrift: if the grain is broken down or imperfect, it
shows trouble with the thrift: if it is mouldy or mildewed, you will
experience losses. An abundance of grain in bulk is likewise a sign of
plenty; but scattered grain is the reverse of this. 69.

GRAPES. To dream of an abundance of grapes is a good omen, as is also
a dream that you eat grapes of a pleasant flavor; but if the grapes
are sour and broken, it shows that you will have sorrow. If a young
girl dreams she has a present of beautiful grapes, she will marry well
within the year, and be prolific of children. 70.

GRASS. Green grass, denotes long life; to cut grass, great trouble. 14,
6.

GRASSPLAT. Is a sign of a wedding. 16, 18, 46.

GRAZING. To see cattle grazing, denotes that you will be fortunate; to
the lover it is a sign he will marry a rich wife, and to the merchant
it foretells a great increase of business. 76, 10.

GRASSHOPPERS. This is an unfavorable dream to the sick, but to a
healthy person it foretells long life. 17, 66.

GRAVE. To dream of a fresh made grave, is a sign of losses: a man of
business will probably lose money that is owing to him. But to lovers,
this sign is apt to be a  “grave to their dearest hopes:” such a dream
is decidedly a bad one for them. 21, 72.

GRAVEL. To see heaps of clean gravel, denotes that you will soon go a
journey by land, which will be a pleasant or profitable one. 44, 19,
22, 1.

GREASE. If you dream of grease, it foretells that any undertaking you
may then be engaged in will go right, and according to your mind: if
the grease is dirty you will experience difficulties, but will get
through them. Lovers who dream of grease, will be able to get married
pretty easy, and have things go slick afterward. 4, 11, 44.

GREEN. If you see green things, such as fruit, grass, green fields,
&c., in your dream, it is a sign of long life, but if the color has
faded it is a sign of trouble. 2, 18.

GRIEF. Dreaming of grief is a sign of a jolly time, as such dreams go
by the rule of contrary. Thus, if you dream you are in great grief
at the death of a friend or relative, you may calculate that a happy
Wedding is soon to come off, at which you will be present. 24, 62.

GRIN. If you dream you see people grinning at you, it shows that you
will do something of which you are ashamed: if you imagine that ladies
are grinning at you, you will probably have some adventure with one
that will make you appear ridiculous. 71, 6.

GRIP, or GRIPPE. To dream you have griping sensations in the bowels,
denotes an accident causing a flesh wound: if you dream that a man
takes you by the hand, or any part of your body, by a hard grip that
hurts you, it is a sign that you will have a pressing invitation to go
somewhere—perhaps a summons to court. 19, 16.

GROAN. To hear groans of agony in your dream, denotes that you will
soon go to a frolic, or to a place where you will be much entertained:
if you see and recognize people groaning, it shows that they will soon
do something to amuse or please you. 41, 8.

GROG. To dream of drinking grog, foretells poverty, or disgrace, or
both. If you dream of drinking toddy that tastes very pleasant and
agreeable, it shows that something will occur which will make you
miserable. 55.

GROTTO. To dream of being in a grotto, or cavern in the earth, shows
that you will soon meet a near and dear relative: if you live away from
home, something will occur to cause your return: such a dream always
foretells meeting your absent friends. 49, 2.

GROVE. (_See Pic-Nic._) To dream of pleasant and verdant groves or
woods, is an excellent sign, as it foretells happiness and success: if
the groves are barren of leaves, it is the reverse, and you will be
poor and unhappy. 65, 78.

  A maid who dreams of verdant groves,
    Will surely have the man she loves;
  But if the groves are nipped with frost,
    She’ll be as sure in marriage crossed.

GROW. If you dream that a tree or shrub grows fast, it is a sign that
you will do something in a hurry that you will afterward be sorry for:
if it be your son, or daughter, or any near young relative that you
imagine to grow very rapidly, it foretells an accident to them. 1, 19.

GRUB. (_See Worm._) To dream of clean-looking, white fat grubs, is a
sign of good crops to farmers, but to dream of black or dirty looking
grubs is the reverse. For a girl to dream of grubs is a bad sign, as it
puts her in peril of losing her virtue; but to a married woman it is a
good sign, for the reason that she will soon be in the family way. 49,
70, 65.

GRUEL. To dream of drinking gruel, is a good sign if you are sick, as
it shows a speedy recovery; but if you are well, it is a sign that some
one will overreach you in a bargain, or that you will do some foolish
act. 2, 11, 22.

GUITAR. This dream denotes luck in love affairs, if the dreamer sings
and plays on the instrument at the same time. 45, 24.

GUN. To dream of firing a gun, or hearing the report of a gun, denotes
strife: if you imagine some friend fires it, it shows that there Will
be a difficulty with him. If you dream of killing a bird, squirrel, or
other animal, by shooting it, it foretells that you will act rashly in
some quarrel. For a lover to dream of firing a gun, is a sign he will
have trouble with his sweetheart. 21, 57, 16.

GUTS. (_See Entrails._)

GUTTER. If you dream of lying in a gutter, or of seeing a man so
reclining, it foretells that some honor awaits you, or some one in
whose success you take an interest. If a girl dreams of a broken
gutter, she should be careful of allowing her lover to be too familiar
with her person, or some accident may happen. 27, 65.

HACK. (_See Carriage._) If you see, in your dream, a row of hacks, or
carriages at a funeral, it shows that you’ll soon attend a wedding or a
jolly party. 32, 19.

HAIL. To dream of a hail-storm, is a sign that you will make a good
bargain, or will be lucky in some undertaking, provided the hail is
white or in crystals; black hail, denotes sorrow and death, therefore
you should never dream of that kind of hail if you can help it. To
dream of seeing white hail lying on the ground intimates that you’ll
soon get plenty of cash in some transaction. 21, 72.

HAIR. If you dream that your hair is thick and bushy, it shows that
you’ll grow rich or powerful; if you dream it is curly and kinky, when
in fact it is not, it is a sign you’ll do something that you will
afterward be ashamed of; if, in your dream, you imagine that your hair
has fallen off, or that it has become extremely thin, it is a bad omen,
as it shadows forth sickness, and perhaps death. 42.

HAM. Dreaming of fine-looking hams is a good omen; but if they are
wormy or in any way blemished, it spoils all the luck, and shows that
you will be unfortunate. To dream of eating fine-tasting hams is a sign
that you will do something noted that will create a talk, but all in
your favor; if the ham that you eat is bad and wormy, the said talk
will be a scandal against you. 30, 1.

HAMMER. To dream that you see or hear hammering, denotes thrift to some
one of your friends; if you are using the hammer yourself, it shows
that you will be fortunate. A hammer is a good article to dream about.
3.

HAND. If you dream that your right hand is injured, or any thing is the
matter with it, it shows that you will soon be called upon to assist
a friend in distress; if it is your left hand, assistance will be
solicited from you for an unfortunate stranger. 22, 78.

HANGED. (_See Execution._) To dream of being hanged is an excellent
omen, as it foretells that you will become either rich or
distinguished. If you dream you are going to be hanged, it is nearly as
good, as it betokens success in all your undertakings; but should you
imagine that you eluded the officers of the law and escaped, that is a
bad omen, as it foretells disappointment and ill-luck. The theory of
such dreams is, that they always work by contraries. 10, 7, 6.

HARP. To dream you play upon the harp, indicates that you have some
envious enemies who seek to injure you with slander. To dream you hear
any person play upon the harp, is a sign that if you have sick friends
they will recover. In love affairs this dream is very lucky. 5, 11.

HARVEST. To dream of a harvest field is a good omen. If you dream you
are working in one it indicates success in business. To lovers, this is
one of the most fortunate signs; to a young man, it signifies he will
wed a rich and beautiful bride; to a young maiden, it is a sign she
will soon be engaged to the object of her affections; to the married,
it signifies domestic bliss. 4, 11, 44.

HASTE. (_See Running and Walking._)

HAT. For a man to dream he has got a new hat shadows forth good luck
and advancement; dreaming of an old or shabby hat is a sign he will
soon fall in love; and if he dreams he is wearing such a hat, the omen
is not so favorable, for he will probably endeavor to take improper
liberties with his sweetheart and be successful. 21, 6.

HATCHING. To dream of hatching fowls of any kind is a sign of thrift;
if you imagine, in your dream, that a hen comes off with a very large
brood of chickens, it shadows forth so much cash to be made by you in
some bargain. 24, 68.

HATRED. To dream that you hate any particular person is a sign that
he or she has been talking bad about you. If a girl should ever be
so silly as to dream such a dream about her lover, it shows that he
meditates an attack upon her chastity; on the contrary, if she dreams
that he hates her, it is a sign that she possesses his whole heart. 44.

HAWK. If you dream of seeing a very large hawk, it shows that you
will soon begin a new enterprise; if the hawk darts down and takes a
chicken, a bird, or a fish, you will probably be successful; if little
birds attack the hawk and drive it away, you will have difficulties in
your undertaking and may possibly fail in it. 5, 55.

HAY. (_See Raking and Harvest._) To dream of making hay, signifies
success in all your undertakings. This is a good omen to young lovers.
To dream you are selling hay is a bad omen, and portends losses in
business and dangerous accidents. 49, 11.

HEAD. To dream of heads in any way is a good omen: if you dream
your own head is very large, it shows that you will probably become
distinguished; if you see a large-headed person in your dream, it is a
sign you will make the acquaintance of some one who will benefit you.
65, 9.

HEAL. If you dream of having a sore on your person that was healed up
quick, it is a sign that some one will cut your acquaintance; if you
have a sweetheart or lover, it is probable something will happen to
break off the intimacy. 20.

HEART. To dream of a heart is a bad omen. If you lose your heart it
signifies sickness and death. To the married it denotes infidelity
of their marital vows. To dream you see a human heart shows you are
sincerely beloved; but to dream you have a pain or palpitation in your
heart shows you are doomed to suffer through treachery. 46, 11.

HEAT. If you dream of being in a place that is extremely hot, or if the
weather is so hot that the heat affects you, it shows that some person
is preparing either to attack you or give you a good scolding. 71, 6.

HEN. (_See Chicken._)

HIDE, or HIDDEN. To dream of concealing anything by hiding it, or
putting it in an out-of-the-way place, is a sign that some one will
reveal a secret that you have told. It is a bad omen for lovers to
dream of hiding things, as it predicts that their intimacy will be
talked about as suspicious. 45, 78.

HILL. To dream of going up a hill is a sign you will rise in the world,
and of going down hill the reverse; if, in your dream, you seem to
be approaching a smooth high hill, it shows that you will shortly
have a piece of good fortune; but if the hill be rugged and stony, it
foretells difficulties in connection with the good fortune. 1, 46, 18.

  To dream of mountains, hills, or rocks,
  Does signify, slouts, scoffs, and mocks;
  Their pains in passing over shew,
  That she whom you love, loves not you.

HISSING. To dream of hearing hissing noises, such as steam makes, or of
geese hissing, is a sign of shame. If a girl dreams this, it foretells
that she will do something she is ashamed of: to a man it is a sign he
will do an undignified act, or one that will injure his prospects. 47.

HOG. To dream of well-kept and happy-looking hogs is a good omen, as it
foretells luck and success: but if you see lean and hungry-looking hogs
squealing, it shows that any speculation you may enter into about that
time will not be of much account if it does not result in a loss. 64.

HOG’S-BRISTLES. This dream denotes great violence and danger. 21, 7.

HOLE. (_See Abyss._)

HOMINY. To dream of eating hominy with a relish is a sign that you will
marry below your station in life, or else you will entertain a new
acquaintance who is much below you in position, who will eventually
command your esteem. To an educated young girl such a dream predicts a
runaway match. 2, 10.

HONEY. This dream denotes you will have a long and happy life. If you
dream you are eating honey it denotes that something will happen that
will give you great joy or pleasure. To a young girl it is a sign that
she will soon have a lover that will please her. 49, 3, 1.

HOPS. To dream of seeing a large garden of hops in full leaf, denotes
thrift and wealth: if you see dried hops, and smell their fragrance,
it shows that you will shortly come into a good lump of money from a
legacy or a successful speculation. 27, 9.

  To maid who dreams of fragrant hops,
  A lover soon the question pops!
  And marries, too, with quick dispatch—
  Nine children fair will bless that match!

HORNS. To see horns on the head of another person, danger to the
dreamer on your own wealth and importance. To dream you are gored by a
horned animal denotes unhappiness. To lovers it usually predicts that
they will have difficulty in connection with their desires; if they
think of marrying, some obstacle will be placed in the way of their
union, though perhaps not prevent it in the end. 9, 18, 36.

HORSE. If you dream of riding well and easily on the back of this
noble animal, your fortune is sure to advance in the world: but if you
imagine you are thrown from a horse, it is a sign of disgrace. To dream
of swapping horses shows that some one will cheat you in a bargain; of
selling a horse, it is a sign of loss; but of buying one, predicts that
you will make money by some speculation, or else by selling property.
Horses are excellent animals to dream about. 2, 11, 22.

HOUSE. (_See Repairing._) To dream you build a house denotes you will
have a comfortable life: to burn your house signifies increased riches:
to dream you spill water in a house is a sign of care and affliction:
to dream you see a house fall denotes death. Dreaming of building
houses, wearing fine clothes, and talking with ladies, is a sign that
the parties will suddenly marry. 47, 66.

HOUSEHOLD UTENSILS. The pot denotes the life; the platter the actions
of life; the candlestick intends the wife; the light, or lantern, the
husband; the hearth the estate; vessels of wine are the servants; the
stores cupboards, and cabinets mean the wife. 24, 7.

HUG. If a young girl dreams of being fondled and hugged by her lover,
it is a sign he will soon get sick of her and want to be off: it is not
half so bad to let him hug her in real earnest as it is to dream of it.
The same sign holds good with the other sex. 2, 11.

HUNGRY. (_See Fast._) To dream of being hungry foretells that you
will soon engage in some new enterprise which will prove successful.
Hungry dreams are excellent omens to lovers, as they denote energy
and success. If a girl dreams that a gentleman comes to see her who
is hungry, it is a sign that he will woo her in such an earnest and
affectionate manner as to win her heart. 19, 37.

HUSBANDRY. To dream of implements in husbandry, has a variety of
interpretations: to dream of a plough, denotes success in life, and a
good marriage; to dream of a yoke, is unfavorable, unless it be broken;
to dream of a team, death in a family, to dream of a scythe signifies
sickness. 76, 44.

HUNTING. To dream of going a hunting brings an accusation of
dishonesty: if you are returning from the chase, good fortune awaits
you. 8, 10.

HUT. To dream that you live in a small hut is a sign that you will
shortly have a house of your own. If in your dream, you visit a little
hut which is inhabited, it shows that you will be invited to partake of
the hospitalities of some family. 29, 70.

ICE. (_See Skating and Sliding._) To dream of walking on slippery ice
in winter, is a sign that misfortune threatens you: if you slip down,
it foreshadows bad luck: if you dream of gliding or skating easily over
smooth ice, it shows that you will probably have a difficulty of some
kind, but will overcome it and get through handsomely. For lovers to
dream of going over ice is a bad omen. 4, 28.

ILLNESS. (_See Sickness._) To dream that you are ill and confined to
your bed is a sign that some one will overreach you in a bargain, or
cheat you in some way. Such a dream is a bad omen to loves, as it
predicts false vows. 16, 38.

ILLUMINATION. To dream of an illumination augurs success in life and
much happiness; if the light begins to disappear, sorrow and many tears
will be your portion. 24, 68.

IMPERTINENCE. If a girl dreams that she meets a gentleman who is
impertinent toward her in conversation, it is a sign she will make a
new male acquaintance who will be very agreeable to her: if she gets
angry at the said impertinence she will probably fall in love with her
new friend and either marry him or be on improper intimate terms with
him. 1, 11.

INDIGO. To dream of indigo, denotes to a female that she will cross the
ocean. When she dreams of putting the indigo in water, and it gives no
color, she may be assured she will arrive in India. But to embrace the
water in the usual way, no such thing will come to pass. 27, 15.

INFANT. (_See Child._) Dreaming of a young infant is an excellent omen,
as it foretells joy and gladness, good luck, and success generally.
Lovers who dream such a dream may be sure of a happy and thrifty
marriage. To a business man this dream predicts a new and successful
enterprise. 29, 76.

INK. To dream that you see splashes of ink on white paper, or on
anything, is a sign of scandal: after such a dream, you may be sure
that somebody will be talking pretty hard about you: the larger the
splashes the bigger will be the stories that are told. 41.

INN. To dream of being at an inn, is very unfavorable; it denotes
poverty and unsuccessfulness in business; to the lover, the
unfaithfulness of his sweetheart; to the tradesman, loss of business
and dishonest agents. 46, 33.

INQUEST. To dream that you are present at a coroner’s inquest, is a bad
sign; you will soon squander your fortune. 49, 16.

INSULT. (_See Abuse._)

INUNDATION. (_See Overflow._)

IRON. (_See Metals._)

ITCH. To dream that you have the itch, or that your body itches, shows
that you will shortly receive money. 40, 9.

ISLAND. To dream that you are on a deserted island shows that you
will commit some act to disgust your friends and make them cut your
acquaintance; be careful how you behave after dreaming such a dream.
19, 65, 22.

IVORY. To dream of ivory, signifies that you will be very successful in
business. To the single it is a sign they will soon fall in love and
be fortunate in their courtship. To the married it denotes domestic
happiness. 4, 75, 30.

IVY. To dream of seeing this vine running over and covering any house,
is a sign of poverty, particularly if the ivy grows thick and abundant:
if you dream that it covers your own house, the sign is still more
sure: for a farmer to dream that he sees ivy covering a tree, denotes
bad crops. A girl who dreams of being in a bower covered with ivy, will
probably marry a poor and shiftless man. 2.

JAIL. (_See Prison._) If a man dreams he is confined in a prison or
jail, it shows that he will have honors or dignities conferred upon
him, as such dreams go contrariwise: if his arrest and imprisonment
worries him, it only shows that he will be the more delighted with his
new dignities. 46.

JAR. To dream that a house is jarred or shook by an earthquake, an
explosion, or anything that may occur outside, is a sign that the head
of the family in that house will be sick. Jars of preserved fruit
or jellies, seen in a dream, are good omens; if you dream you are
presented with one or more of them, it shows you will be long lived and
thrifty. 15, 39.

JEALOUSY. To dream you are jealous of your sweetheart, or wife,
signifies that they will betray you; for a maiden to dream she is
jealous of her sweetheart is a sign some particular friend will  “_cut
her out_;” for a wife to dream she is jealous of her husband, foretells
the loss of his love. 28, 6.

JELLY. To dream of having pots of jelly given to you, or that you are
eating jelly, and that plenty of it is around, is a sure sign of long
life and good fortune generally; as many pots as are given to you, or
as you may have, so many generations will you live to see. The same
rule applies to preserved fruits. 65, 18, 78.

JEW. If you dream that a genuine Israelite comes along and annoys you
in any way, it is a sign you will quarrel with your father; if you
imagine that he cheats you in a bargain, it predicts that you will
probably receive a present from some near relative; on the contrary, if
he gives you an advantage in the bargain, it shows that your father, or
some elderly relative, will ask a favor of you. 58, 21.

JEWELS. Chains, pearls, or precious stones, etc., and all adornings
upon the heads and necks of women, are good dreams for the fair sex; to
widows and maids they signify marriage; and to those that are married,
riches. If a man dreams of possessing jewels, it is a sure sign he will
lose something of great value. 46, 75.

JIG. To dream of dancing a jig with a lady is a sign she is in love
with you, or is pleased with you; and if you like her you may go in at
once for her favor with much confidence. The omen is the same to a girl
who dreams of jigging with a young man. 1, 65, 14.

JOLLY. If you dream you are in company and feel particularly hilarious,
or jolly, it is a sign of sorrow; mark well who it is that contributes
most to your mirth, for he or she may cause you pain. If a girl dreams
this of a young man, let her beware of him for a gay seducer. 20.

JOY. To dream that you are in the ecstasy of joy at anything that has
happened, bodes pain and trouble; something will be sure to occur to
make you unhappy. 46.

JUMPING. (_See Leaping._)

JURY. If a man dreams he is serving on a jury, it is a sign some friend
will ask a favor of him that he will hesitate to grant. 38, 3.

KALEIDOSCOPE. To dream you are looking through one of these curious
instruments, and if you are delighted with the changes that present
themselves, it is a sign, that you will either travel in distant
countries or be very discontented at home. 36, 75.

KEG. To dream of an empty one is a sign you will soon leave home; a
keg of small fish, or oysters, denotes the receipt of money; a keg
of spirits of any kind, promises poverty; a keg of powder foretells
misfortune; a keg of paint predicts compliments to be paid you. 14.

KEY. If you dream of finding a key, or a bunch of keys, it is a sign
that some one will tell you a secret; to dream of losing a key, or
keys, is a bad omen, as it predicts that you will come to shame. Such a
dream is particularly unfortunate to a young lady. 41, 8.

KID. To dream of a young and sportful kid, implies the birth of a
child. A young girl who grants her lover too close intimacy before
marriage should never dream of the innocent and harmless kid. It is a
good dream for married people who desire children. 70.

KING. To dream of a king denotes that the dreamer is ambitious and will
be disappointed. If you dream you speak to a king it is a happy omen,
and is a sign of riches and honor. 4, 14.

KILL. If you dream of wantonly killing any animal, or insect, it
predicts bad luck and poverty; but if the killing be done by accident,
it shows that, though you may have a misfortune in consequence, it will
not materially affect your interest. For butchers or farmers to dream
of killing fat and healthy animals for food, is a sign of thrift and
abundance; but if they dream of killing a hog that does not squeal, it
shadows forth a death in the family. 41.

KISSING. (_See Stranger._) Dreams of kissing work curiously: if a
girl dreams that she is kissed by a young man in whom she takes no
particular interest, it may be a good omen, and it may not; for if he
happens to be a silly fellow who imagines that she is in love with
him, it is a sign she will be slandered in a way that will make her
unhappy; but if he has no such sentiment, then the sign is exactly the
reverse—that is, some one will speak well of her to those whom she
esteems highly—perhaps to her lover. If a girl dreams she is kissed by
her lover, it predicts that he will say something unpleasant to her at
their next meeting; if a lover dreams that his sweetheart kisses him
the sign is similar. 1.

KITE. To dream of flying a kite is a sign that you will soon write a
letter to some friend or acquaintance. For a girl to dream of seeing a
kite in the air, predicts that she will receive a letter from a young
man—whether a lover or not, is uncertain. 53, 62.

KNEE. To dream of falling on the knees, denotes misfortune in business.
To see a woman’s knees, good luck and marriage to the girl of your
choice. For a woman to see a man’s knee, shows that she will have many
male children. 22, 37, 35.

KNIVES. To dream of knives is a bad omen; it betokens law-suits,
poverty, disgrace, and strife. In love, it shows quarrels and bad
tempers. 33, 9.

LABOR. To dream you are hard at work, shows you will go a painful
journey, unless you be very circumspect; but to see others at work,
betokens good fortune. If a girl dreams she sees her lover at work, it
signifies that he will try and seduce her. 27, 9.

LADDER. To dream of going up a ladder signifies that you will be
a person of some consequence, yet poor: if you imagine you are in
danger of falling, it shows that a person who envies your position
will attempt to injure you; if you dream of going down a ladder it
particularly denotes poverty, though it may allude to some misfortune
that will overtake you. 14, 55.

LADIES. To see one, a sign of weakness; many ladies bring calumny and
slander. To see a light-haired one, is a happy event to the dreamer; a
brunette, sickness; a pregnant lady, brings good news; a naked lady,
signifies the death of a relative. To hear a lady speak, without seeing
her, foretells departure. 47, 51, 11.

LAKE. If you dream of sailing on a smooth and clear lake, it
foreshadows success in all your undertakings; if the lake is rough,
but yet has clear water, the sign still holds good, though you will
encounter difficulties; if it is muddy water, it denotes sickness, and
losses through dishonest people about you. 49, 17.

LAMBS. To see young lambs frisking around their mother, is an excellent
omen, as it denotes thrift, and also happiness in your family ties; if
you see them sucking, it is a sign of an increase in your family by
the birth of a child. For lovers to dream of young lambs, foretells a
speedy and happy marriage. 24, 60.

LAMP. To dream of dropping or breaking a lighted lamp, denotes
disappointment. If, in your dream, you see the bright light of a lamp
at a distance from you in the dark, and you approach it, it shows that
you will either have good luck, or will be invited to visit somewhere
and meet an agreeable person of the opposite sex. 19.

LAND. To dream of buying or inheriting land, is an excellent omen, as
it foretells health and wealth; but to sell land in your dream, denotes
sickness and poverty. If a young man dreams of buying land, it is a
sign he will marry a rich wife. 34, 61, 18.

LANTERN. To dream of carrying a lantern in a dark night is a good sign,
provided you have no difficulty in finding your way, for it shows
that you will easily accomplish some fortunate object you may have
in view; if you stumble, or have difficulty in finding your way with
the lantern, it denotes trouble and vexation, though success will be
achieved at last. 28, 10.

LARK. To dream of the lark, shows speedy increase of fortune. To
lovers, this is a very favorable omen, and is a sign that the course of
true love runs smooth. 47, 68.

LAUGHTER. This omen is unfavorable, and is a sign of tears; it also
denotes that you will be worsted by your business engagements; if a
lover dreams he sees his sweetheart laugh, it is a sign she will jilt
him for a stranger; to the married it signifies domestic trouble. 40.

LAUREL or OLIVE. Denotes victory and pleasure; to the married,
inheritance and children; to the single, marriage. 71, 13, 1.

LAW. To dream of instituting a suit at law, or entering a criminal
complaint against any one, shows that some enemy will injure you
pecuniarily, or that you will lose money by speculation or trade; if
you dream you are sued, or prosecuted criminally, the sign is the
reverse; you will probably receive money unexpectedly, or be uncommonly
successful in your pursuits. 21, 8.

LAWYER. To dream of meeting a lawyer, brings bad tidings; if you speak
to him, you will lose some property; if you hear some one speaking in
his favor, you will meet with some misfortune. 16.

LAZY. To dream that you see lazy people lounging around, and that you
are vexed with them, is a sign of bad luck to some of your relatives,
who will depend upon you to assist them: if, in your dream, you imagine
yourself to be lazy and sleepy over your work, it foretells either
sickness or that you will meet with a loss. 62, 39, 69.

LEAD. (_See Metals._)

LEAPING. To dream you are leaping over walls, doors or gates, is a sign
that you will encounter many difficulties in your present pursuits and
that your sweetheart will not marry you. 9, 31.

LEAVES. To dream you see leaves growing freshly on a tree or plant,
is a good sign, and shows you will live long and be happy; but to see
leaves wither and fall to the ground, is a sign of sickness and death.
47, 21.

LEGS. To dream of thick and fat legs is a bad omen, as it foreshadows
sickness: thin, spindleshank legs are excellent ones to dream about, as
they denote a successful race with fortune. It is not to be supposed
that a lover will ever dream of his sweetheart’s legs, but if he should
do so, he will probably imagine them to be round, plump, and of an
alabaster whiteness; this is a bad dream, and he should by all means
avoid thinking of her legs when he goes to sleep: if a lady dreams that
her lover’s legs are thin, it foretells that he will be a rich man. 48,
5.

LEMONS. To dream of lemons denotes contentions in your family and
uneasiness on account of children; they announce the death of some
relation and disappointment in love. 22.

LEOPARD. To dream of this animal, signifies that you have many false
friends, who are endeavoring to ruin you, it also betokens family
quarrels and domestic unhappiness. 24, 76.

LETTERS. These paper missives are good to dream about: if you dream you
receive a great number of letters, it foretells that honors await you:
to receive one letter in your dream, denotes that some one is praising
you behind your back. If a girl dreams that she receives a love-letter
from her beau, it shows that he adores her: a gentleman who has a
similar dream of a letter from his sweetheart, may rest satisfied that
he only possesses her heart. 28, 54, 1.

LETTER CARRIER. To dream of a letter carrier, indicates you will hear
from an absent one whom you love. 18, 50.

LETTUCE. To dream of eating lettuce, is a sign of health and happiness,
provided that it looks green and nice, and tastes good; wilted or wormy
lettuce shadows forth vexation and trouble. 47, 6.

LIAR. To dream that any one offends you by lying, or defaming your
family by lies, is a sign you will receive a benefit at the hands of a
stranger. 36.

LIBERTY. To dream of taking liberties with any one, bids you be careful
of them; if others take liberties with you, it shows they intend to
cheat you. 39, 40.

LICE. To dream of lice denotes sickness and poverty. 3.

LIE. To dream of telling a lie about a woman, is a sign you will kiss
a black one: to dream that you lie about your business, denotes that a
colored man will rob you: lies generally, imagined in dreams, denote
either injuries or caresses by colored people. 14, 64.

LIGHT. (_See Candles, Lamp and Torch._) To dream you see a great light,
is a happy presage; it denotes that you will attain honors, and become
rich; in love it shows a sweetheart of an amiable disposition. 8, 70, 2.

LIGHTNING. To dream of bright and vivid white lightning, denotes that
you will soon go on a pleasant trip or journey: blueish silver forked
lightning foretells good crops and excellent success in business; red
forked lightning the same, but attended with calamity, or the death of
relatives by violence. 24.

LILIES. If you dream of an abundance of these beautiful flowers in
your garden or door-yard, it foretells good luck in getting servants
or people to work for you; it also denotes thrift generally about a
farm. If a young girl dreams about lilies, it is a sign she will marry
a smart and industrious man and live happily with him. 61.

LIMEKILN. To dream of burning lime in a kiln, or of seeing a kiln
in full blast, is a sign of health and abundant crops; but to see a
dilapidated and empty limekiln in your dream is the reverse of this, as
far as the crops are concerned. 77, 5, 15.

LINEN. To dream you are arrayed in clean linen denotes that you
will shortly receive some glad tidings; and that your sweetheart is
faithful; if it is dirty, then it denotes poverty and disappointment
in love. White linen, if dressed in it, presages death; colored linen,
removal; shifts, a gay sweetheart; gowns, a gift. 24, 71.

LION. If you dream of seeing the king of beasts, and if he is mild and
gentle looking, it shows that you will easily rise in the world to a
better position than you now occupy: to dream of an angry and roaring
lion, who tries to get at you, shows, that although you may rise in
position, jealous people will annoy and try to injure you. 14.

  Dreams of lions, bears, bulls, bees,
  Nests of wasps or hornets, these
  Are emblems whereby are expressed
  Discord with those whom you love best.

LIPS. (_See Mouth._)

LIQUOR. If you dream of seeing large quantities of liquor, or of buying
brandy, rum, whisky, &c., it foretells poverty and disgrace; to dream
of drinking it is the same, only worse if possible. 2.

LIZARD. To dream of lizards, is a sign you have secret enemies who will
injure you if they can. If a girl dreams this, it shows that some one
will question her virtue. 3.

LOG. To dream of seeing large logs around, is a sign that you will soon
move into a new house; but if you imagine that you are splitting the
logs, it will spoil all this, for it shows that you will want a house
badly without being able to get one to your mind. 21, 78.

LOOKING-GLASS. To dream of a looking-glass, is a bad omen, and
signifies that you will be surrounded with false friends, who will rob
you until your property dwindles to a shadow. To dream you see your
face in a looking-glass is a sign of sickness. To break a looking-glass
portends death. If a girl dreams she sees her lover in a looking-glass,
it is a sign he will desert or seduce her. 18, 61.

LOSSES. To dream of losing your hat is a sign you will entertain a
large company, either by making a speech, or otherwise attracting their
attention: dreaming of the loss of money, a watch, or any valuables of
that kind, predicts that you will gain as much and perhaps more than
your loss amounts to: if a girl dreams of losing her shoe-strings, she
will be kissed by an agreeable young man; any article of clothing that
you may dream of having lost, shows that you will rig yourself out in a
new suit. 47, 6.

LOTTERY. (_See Prize._)

LOVE. To dream you are in love is a sign you will make a fool of
yourself and do something silly, of which you may afterwards be
ashamed—thus showing that the dream works contrariwise—for love is
anything but a silly sentiment unless indulged in by fools. For a young
girl to dream of falling in love foretells that she will be laughed at
and ridiculed for some folly. 64, 52, 1.

LUCK. To imagine in your dream that you have had excellent luck, in any
enterprise, predicts a misfortune: if a man has had a quarrel with his
sweetheart, and dreams that it is all made up, he may be sure that the
quarrel will continue a great deal longer than is agreeable to him: to
a young lady, the sign is the same relative to her beau. 18.

MAD DOG. To dream of seeing such an animal frothing at the mouth and
running, is a sign you will be wrongfully accused of a dishonorable
action or crime. 4, 12, 61.

MAGGOTS. To dream of seeing any thing putrid and covered with maggots,
is a sign of death; but the death may be that of your favorite dog,
cat, or bird, though such a dream often foretells the death of a
relative or friend. 5.

MAID. (_See Virgin._) If you dream you are pleased with a pretty
chambermaid, milkmaid, or any nice-looking young girl, whose occupation
carries with it the title of maid, it is a good omen, for it predicts
an excellent match, and plenty of children: it also foretells, in many
cases, that the dreamer will marry a rich wife. 75, 39.

MAN. To dream of a man dressed in black is lucky; in white, a bad omen:
to dream of a murdered man, is a sign of long life. To dream you meet a
strange man, is a sign you have a vindictive enemy. For a girl to dream
she sees her lover by her bedside, is a sign he will attempt some very
improper things. 74, 60, 7.

MANNERS. To dream of ill-mannered people, who annoy you by their
awkwardness and selfish conduct, shows that you will shortly go on a
journey, and be introduced to a fool. 6, 65.

MAP. To dream of looking over a map, is a sign of an agreeable surprise
by the arrival of some dear friend from a distance. If a girl dreams
this when her lover is away, he will return unexpectedly. 24, 17.

MARKET. To dream you are in a large market, where all kinds of meats
and vegetables are sold, is a sign you will want money that it will
be difficult and perhaps impossible to raise; it is a bad sign for
tradesmen and others who have notes to pay. 31, 9.

MARRIAGE. (_See Wedding._) If any one should be so unfortunate as to
dream that he or she was present at a happy and jolly wedding, it
denotes that they will attend a funeral; it will not necessarily be at
the burial of either of the persons you dreamed you saw married, but
you will undoubtedly be called to mourn some friend or relative. To
dream of being married yourself, foretells your death. 2, 78, 42.

MASK. To dream you see a person wearing a mask, is a sign of hypocrisy;
to the lover, it shows that his sweetheart loves some one better than
himself; to a girl, it signifies that her lover is engaged to another.
To married people, it portends infidelity to the wedding-ring. 46, 8.

MASS. To dream of going to this religious celebration, is a sign that
some one will either cheat you or rob your house. If a girl dreams
this, let her look out that her lover does not prove to be a worthless
scamp. 13.

MEADOW. (_See Field and Green._) If you dream of walking in a green and
pleasant meadow, where the grass grows regular and looks smooth, it is
an excellent omen, for it denotes thrift and good luck generally. Such
a dream to a farmer, is a sign of good crops and plenty of money. To
lovers, it foretells a happy and speedy marriage. 72, 6.

MEANNESS. To dream you are treated in a mean and shabby manner by
anybody, is a sign you will have unexpected honors thrust upon you. If
a girl dreams that her lover has behaved meanly, she may be sure he
will do something to command her admiration. 9, 50, 51.

MEASLES. To dream you have this troublesome disorder shows that
you will be fortunate, provided you engage in some disreputable or
dishonest speculation, or in a robbery of money: but to conscientious
people the omen does not hold good. If a girl dreams of having the
measles, it predicts that a rogue will make love to her. 33, 4.

MEAT. To dream of sweet and wholesome fresh meat is a sign you will be
coquetted by a lady, and perhaps fall in love with her; but if the meat
is putrid or maggoty, it foreshadows sickness and death. 8, 16.

MEDICINE. (_See Physic._) To take medicine foretells poverty, to give
any one medicine, gain. 22, 37, 8.

MELONS. To dream of ripe, fine looking melons, is an excellent omen, as
it foretells good health, good luck, and much happiness. A watermelon
full of black seeds denotes so much money to be paid to you. If a
married woman dreams this, it promises her many children. 46.

METALS. To dream of metals has different signification and
interpretations according to the metal you dream of. To enable our
readers to more readily discover the meaning of their dreams, we
subjoin a list of the metals with their explanations.

BRASS. To dream that you see a brass ornament, is a sign your
sweetheart will be false to you. To see any one working in brass, or
cleaning that metal is a sign you will hear of the death of a distant
relative who will leave you a legacy. 43, 11.

COPPER. To dream of copper, signifies that your sweetheart is
deceitful and loves another, it also shows secret enemies. 54, 8, 40.

GOLD. To dream of receiving gold is a good sign, and shows
you will be successful in all your undertakings. To dream you pay gold
betokens increase of friends. 49, 7.

IRON. For one to dream that he is hurt with iron, signifies
that he shall receive some damage. 44, 5.

LEAD. To dream of lead denotes sickness, but to dream of
leaden bullets good news. If you dream you are wounded by a leaden
bullet it is a sign you will be successful in love. 49, 50.

QUICKSILVER. To dream of this metal is a sign your friends
will all be false to you, it is also a sign of losses in property. 49,
19.

SILVER. To dream that you are presented with spoons, or
any silver plate for household use, foretells that you or some near
relative, will shortly marry: if you dream of buying these articles, it
is a sign of poverty: to dream of silver dollars, or bars of silver,
used in commerce, is a sign that you will gain money either by a legacy
or speculation. 49, 6.

STEEL. To break a piece in a dream, shows that you will
overcome your enemies; if you only touch it, your position in life is
secure; if you try to bend it, and cannot, you will meet with many
serious accidents. 41, 50.

TIN. To dream of tin is a good omen and signifies you will
marry a rich wife, and make money at business. 41, 8.

ZINK. To dream of this metal denotes happiness and prosperity
to the dreamer. To lovers it is a sign of success in love affairs. 48.

MIDWIFE. To see a midwife denotes revealing of secrets; to the sick, it
is death. 18, 4.

MILK. (_See Pitcher and Breast._) Dreaming of milk predicts, to a man,
the love of a lady. If a newly married lady dream that she has a full
breast of milk, it is a sign that she will be happily delivered of a
fine child; to an old woman, it portends much money. 45, 60.

MILL. If you dream of going to a flouring-mill, where you see plenty
of grain and flour, it is a good omen, as it shadows forth thrift and
abundance; but to imagine in your dream that you are in any manufactory
of cloth fabrics called a mill, is a sign of poverty and want. Girls
who work in such places should be careful never to dream of them. 55.

MISER. To dream of a miser is a sign of waste, loss or destruction: if
you see him counting and hoarding money, it foretells you will either
lose or be robbed of some: to see him patching his clothes or his
house or barn denotes a calamity, such as a robbery or a fire. 14, 62.

MISFORTUNE. To dream you have a misfortune denotes luck and success:
thus; dreaming of the loss of money is a sign you will get some: if you
imagine your house is burned, you will be successful in a speculation:
if you dream of being robbed, it foretells a legacy or the finding of
something valuable, &c. 41.

MISTAKE. If any one dreams of being vexed, annoyed, or injured by
reason of making a mistake, it shadows forth disgrace. Mistaking one
person for another in your dream, denotes scandal: thus if a young girl
should dream that she hailed a young man as her lover, and found it was
a stranger, it shows that some malicious person will talk lightly of
her character. 78, 16.

MONEY. (_See Purse and Pocket Book._) To dream of finding money is an
excellent omen, as it foretells that you will soon get some: if, in
your dream, you see bank bills of a large denomination, or large gold
pieces, the sign is similar: to see small pieces of money is not so
good, though it is a pretty fair dream. To dream of receiving money
is a good omen; in love, it foretells marriage and children. To dream
you lose money, is a proof you will be unsuccessful in some favorite
pursuit. 18, 4.

MONKEY. To dream that you see a monkey, and are pleased with his
antics, shows that you will make the acquaintance of a fool. For a girl
to dream of playing with a monkey is a sign she will do something she
is ashamed of, and perhaps lose her virtue. Monkeys are also a sign of
law suits and secret enemies. 17, 6.

MOON. To dream of a sharp new moon with horns pointing upwards is a
sign you will be rich: if the horns point sideways or downward, it
foretells poverty: seeing a full moon in your dream denotes a thrifty
and happy marriage: a half moon shadows forth the loss of a wife or
husband by death or desertion. Dreaming of seeing a half moon is fatal
to the prospects of lovers. 19, 18.

MOUNTAIN. To dream of approaching beautiful smooth-looking mountains,
dressed in verdure, denotes thrift and happiness, and that you will
rise in the world: if the mountains look steep, rugged and rocky, it
foreshadows difficulties and danger, which you may overcome by energy:
to dream of successfully climbing a mountain, is a sure sign that
some honor awaits you, or that you will make a good deal of money:
difficulties in climbing show troubles and vexations in getting your
honors or your money. 64.

MOTH. To dream of moth is a sign some one is robbing you, it also
predicts slander by a supposed friend. To dream you see a moth burn its
wings in a flame signifies that an enemy will die. 22.

MOTHER. If you dream of quarreling with your mother, it is a sign she
will do some generous act, or confer a benefit that will delight you:
to dream of fondling your mother shadows forth her loss by death, or
that you will be parted from her: if you dream she makes you a present,
the dream will come true so far that she will probably present you with
a new brother or sister. 46, 34.

MOURNING. To dream that you are dressed in mourning for the death of a
relative, is a sign that a wedding will soon take place in your family,
or that of some blood relation. To see people dressed in black, and be
among them, foretells an invitation to a wedding or to be present at a
marriage ceremony. 32, 12.

MOUSE. (_See Trap._) To dream of killing a mouse is a sign you will
detect a thief in stealing from you: if, in your dream, you see a
mouse, or a number of mice, it foretells that you will soon have
thieves in the house. For a girl to dream that she pets a mouse, shows
that she will have a light-fingered or dishonest lover. 75, 70.

MOUTH. Dreaming of a large mouth and big lips is a sure sign you will
be kissed by some one of the opposite sex: to dream of a mouth out
of shape, or with a hare lip, denotes to a woman that she will have
a deformed child, and to a man that he will get into a difficulty by
means of his intimacy with a woman: to dream of a small mouth and thin
lips is a sign of loud and angry words, and that some one will give you
a scolding. 27, 6, 3.

MOVING. To dream of moving your residence or place of business, under
any circumstances, is a sign of poverty: if, in your dream, you see
other people moving, it foretells that some one of your relatives will
come to poverty, and you will have to assist him. 55.

MUD. To dream of getting covered with mud by having it splashed over
you, is a sign that you will be belied and talked about. 29.

MULBERRIES. To dream of mulberries denotes to the maiden, a happy
marriage; to the married, affection and constancy. 64, 70, 3.

MULATTO. (_See Negro._) To see a mulatto in sleep, brings good luck; a
female mulatto, dangerous sickness. 4, 11, 44.

MULE. To dream of riding a mule, or driving one, is a sign of celibacy:
gentlemen or ladies who dream this may safely calculate that they will
live single for the rest of their lives, unless some more vivid dream
with a favorable omen should counterbalance the influence of this
one. If married people dream of mules, it foretells that they will be
childless. 4, 51, 66.

MUSHROOM. To dream you eat mushrooms is a sign you will live to a good
old age, but to dream you see them grow, or gather them, is a sign you
will get rich by a splendid speculation, and then get poor as suddenly
as you got wealthy. 49, 59.

MUSIC. (_See Singing._) To dream of hearing strains of sweet music,
denotes joy and happiness. If a girl who has a lover dreams this, he
will surprise her either with a splendid present, or with an invitation
to go somewhere where she will be delighted and enjoy herself much. 74,
18.

MUSTARD. To dream of mustard or mustard seed, is a bad omen, and
foretells sickness and perhaps death. To dream you eat mustard, is a
sign your sweetheart or lover is false to you. To married persons this
dream indicates domestic quarrels. 4.

MYRTLE. To dream of myrtle, is a sign you will receive a declaration of
love. To the married it signifies domestic happiness. 3, 11, 33.

NAILS. To dream that one’s nails are longer than usual, signifies
profit, and the contrary, loss: to dream your nails are cut off,
signifies loss and disgrace, and contention with friends and relations.
If one dreams his nails are pulled off, it threatens with misery and
affliction, and danger of death: for a man to dream he bites his
nails, shows quarrels and dissensions: to dream of paring your nails,
foretells a lingering sickness. 57, 8.

NAKEDNESS. To dream you see a man naked, signifies fear and terror: to
dream you see a woman naked, signifies honor and joy, provided she be
fair-skinned and handsome; but if she is crooked, old, wrinkled, or
otherwise ill made, and black withal, it signifies shame, repentance,
and ill luck. For a woman to dream she sees her husband naked,
signifies success in her enterprises and a good number of children. 14.

NAPKIN. A white napkin denotes orderly conduct, which will bring
happiness; a dirty napkin, disorderly behavior. 70, 6.

NAVEL. If you dream that your navel is out of shape, or looks queer,
it is a sign of misfortune in connection with the opposite sex, unless
you are married, in which case it denotes the birth of a child: for
unmarried people to dream such dreams foretells trouble and disgrace.
35, 17.

NECK. If a woman or girl dreams that her neck is large and thick, it
is a sure sign she will bear many children: if it seems smaller than
usual, it denotes to a married woman a miscarriage, and to a girl
the loss of her beau: if a woman dreams that her neck is fair and
beautiful, it foretells that some gentleman will make love to her. 22.

NECKLACE. For a girl to dream that a gentleman presents her with a
necklace, is a sign that some one meditates an attempt to seduce her:
if a married woman dreams that her husband gives her a necklace, it
shows that she will soon be in the family way. 69, 12, 21.

NEEDLES. To dream of needles, signifies that you will be grievously
injured by the deceit of supposed friends. For a girl to dream that
she pricks herself with a needle, is a sign that her beau will attempt
improper liberties. 8, 49.

NEGRO. To dream of being frightened or assaulted by a negro, is a
good sign, as it denotes safety: if the negro comes towards you in a
pleasant and agreeable way, it shows that you will meet with a loss or
be robbed: to see a grinning, pleasant-looking negro in your dream,
forebodes trouble through the conduct of a dependent. 32.

NEW YEAR’S PRESENT. To dream you give a New Year’s present, signifies
you will hear good news. To receive one, is a sign you will soon get
into trouble. 64, 19.

NIAGARA. As every one has heard of this great cataract, and multitudes
have seen it, it is not strange that a good many people dream of going
there: such a dream is a sign that you will be embarrassed in company
by a sensation of some kind. 13, 49, 6.

NIGHT. (_See Stars._) To dream of a clear beautiful night when the
stars are shining, indicates that you will have a long and happy life
and be very successful in all your undertakings. To dream you are
courting your sweetheart on such a night shows that she is true to you.
To dream of a cloudy night portends disasters in business, and to dream
of a stormy night indicates sickness. 5, 19.

NIGHTCAP. For a girl to dream that she forgot to take off her nightcap,
but received company in it, is a sign she will be kissed by a strange
gentleman, or that some stranger will be smitten by her charms: if
a married woman dreams this, it foretells that her husband will be
jealous of her, and perhaps not without cause. 70.

NIGHTINGALE. To dream of this bird signifies light amours; to hear it
sing, happiness. 48.

NOBILITY. Should anybody be so foolish as to dream that they are
created a Duke, an Earl, or that they have conferred upon them any
patent of nobility, it is a sign of shiftlessness and poverty. If a
girl dreams that a lord is in love with her, she will be apt to marry a
shiftless and needy fellow. 21, 19.

NOISE. If you dream of hearing strange or mysterious noises, it is a
sign that the spirit of some dead relative hovers near you, and has an
influence upon your actions. 20.

NOSE. To dream of big-nosed people is generally a good omen, as such
persons are usually smart and energetic. To dream of snub noses is a
sign of a quarrel, or that you will be abused by somebody. 48.

NUGGET. This is an English word for a lump of gold: to dream of digging
a big nugget of pure gold, is a sign of wealth and honors. Dreams
relative to gold or silver promise good fortune always. 4, 11, 44.

NUN. For a young girl to dream of seeing a sober-looking nun, is
a sign of celibacy; if she imagines she speaks to the nun she may
safely calculate on being an old maid; if a young man dreams this, it
foretells that he will suspect his sweetheart of being untrue to him,
and probably discard her altogether. 29, 65.

NURSE. Dreaming of a nurse for lying-in women foreshadows luck and
plenty of cash; to a farmer, such a dream prognosticates abundant
crops, and to newly married people good crops of children. 28.

NUTS. To dream of nuts denotes riches and happiness; to the lover,
success; if you are gathering them, it is a good omen; but if you crack
them, unfavorable. 48, 6.

OAK. To dream of seeing a very large oak tree, and of gathering acorns
under it, is a sign that some wealthy relative will leave you a fortune
by will: if anybody dreams this who does not happen to have wealthy
relations, it may turn out that somebody else will take the liberty of
making a will in his or her favor; if not, a streak of good luck will
come in some other way to make the matter right. 65.

OAR. If you dream of sailing in a boat, and losing one or more of the
oars, it is a sign of the death of your father, mother, or guardian, or
of some one to whom you look for protection: if an engaged young girl
or a married woman dreams this, it foretells the death of a lover or
husband. 2.

OATH. To dream of taking a solemn oath before a magistrate, or in a
court of justice, foretells quarreling and litigation: even if you are
a timid and quiet person, such a dream promises that some one will
quarrel with you. 20.

OATS. To dream of this grain foretells a journey by land: if an engaged
young girl dreams of oats, it denotes that her wedding tour is not far
off. 69.

OCEAN. (_See Sea._)

ODD FELLOW. To dream of joining a society of this order foretells
sickness and distress: if you are already an Odd Fellow, and dream of
strife in the Lodge, and that you are in danger of being turned out, it
is a sign that you will attain a higher station in life by riches or
honors. 2.

OFFICER. (_See Police._) To dream that a military officer is in your
company shadows forth beggary and disgrace. If a girl dreams that she
has such a person for a lover, she may calculate that her first suitor
will be a poor shoat, of no account whatever. 70, 28.

OIL. To dream it is spilled on the floor, signifies damage; to spill it
on yourself, profit. 1, 41.

OLD MAN. To dream of seeing a man bowed down with age is a sign of good
luck in business, and to a politician it denotes advancement. This is
not a good dream for females, for to them it denotes want. 63.

OLD WOMAN. To dream of an aged woman is generally a good omen, as it
shadows forth domestic happiness: to a married woman such a dream
foretells the birth of a child: to a young girl, that she will have an
offer of marriage. 3.

ONIONS. To dream of this vegetable, denotes both good and bad luck: if
you are eating them, you will soon receive some money; your sweetheart
will be faithful, but cross, and you will be engaged in some dispute;
if you are throwing onions away, it is the forerunner of mischief; in
love, quarrels; in trade, opposition. 5, 8, 48.

OPERA. To dream of going to the opera is a sign you will travel: if you
hear a new singer that delights you, it foretells that you will make a
new acquaintance on some journey: if an engaged young lady dreams of
the opera, her wedding journey is thus shadowed forth. 27, 55.

OPIUM. To dream of this drug foretells sickness and poverty: if you
imagine that you see some one under the influence of opium, and in
danger of dying, it foretells a misfortune either to yourself or some
near relative. 64.

ORANGE. To dream of having an abundance of oranges, shadows forth that
you will get just so much yellow gold: if you dream of eating them, it
promises you health: if you give them to friends, it foretells that you
will be honored and esteemed: if a girl dreams that her lover presents
her with fine-looking oranges, he will undoubtedly bring her a fortune
when she marries. 3, 12, 36.

ORCHARD. If, in your dream, you imagine you are in a fine orchard, and
the fruit looks fair and tempting, and you eat of it, it foretells
that you will shortly be engaged in some pleasant adventure either of
love or intrigue: if you see rotten, wormy, or scraggy-looking apples,
it shows that you will be thrown into mean and low company, much to
your disgrace. Such dreams are bad ones for young girls. 18, 12.

ORGAN. To dream of hearing the solemn and enchanting music of a church
organ is a sad omen to young girls, as it foretells their early death:
if a gentleman dreams this, it points to the death of some young girl
in whom he takes an interest, and perhaps to his sweetheart, if he has
one. To imagine you hear some lively tune on a street organ is also a
bad omen, as it foretells that you will soon attend a funeral. 55, 3.

OVEN. (_See Baking._)

OVERFLOW. (_See Flood._) To dream that a river, or any stream,
overflows its banks and surrounds your house with water, is a sign of
wealth; that is, you will acquire riches in proportion to the quantity
of water around, and the ground it covers: if you fancy that any one is
drowned in the water, it foretells a misfortune in connection with your
riches. 9, 66, 18.

OWL. To dream of seeing one of these birds of night in a roosting
position, is a sign that you will discover an important secret that
relates to yourself: to see an owl flying foretells that some secret of
your own will get out. 3.

OXEN. (_See Cattle._)

OYSTERS. If, in your dream, you imagine you are eating oysters, it
denotes that you will have difficulties relative to money matters: but
to rake them out of the water is a sign of money-getting: to dream of
opening nice fat oysters for other people to eat is also a favorable
omen, as it shows that you will have plenty of cash. 7, 53.

PAINTING. To dream of painting your house is a sign of sickness in the
family, but at the same time thrift and good luck in business: if,
in your dream, you see a white house newly painted outside, you will
probably soon be summoned to attend a funeral: to see any other colored
house newly painted, foretells that you will hear of the sickness of
a friend or relative: dreaming of beautiful paintings of landscapes,
portraits, &c., is an omen of bad luck and poverty. 22, 11, 5.

PALL-BEARER. For a man to dream that he is a pall-bearer at a funeral,
denotes that he will be married within a year: to dream of seeing
pall-bearers, is a sign you will be invited to a wedding. 49, 6.

PANCAKE. (_See Thick._) For a girl to dream of baking pancakes, is
a sign that some gentleman is in love with her; and if a married
woman has such a dream, she may be sure that some man, other than her
husband, admires her; to dream of eating pancakes, foretells falling in
love, to either sex; and if you relish them, you will be successful in
your love. 36.

PANTALOONS. If you dream you have a new pair of pantaloons, it is a
sign you will be prosperous; if they do not fit, and are too tight, it
is a sign you will be pinched in money matters; if they are dark, it
is a sign of long life, but if light, it denotes sickness. Young girls
should try and not dream about pantaloons, for such an omen is very
dangerous to them. 46, 8.

PANTHER. To dream that you see one of these animals, and are terrified
by it, shows that you will be disgusted at the ingratitude of a friend
you have served: if, in your dream, you see a tame panther, and
caress it, it foretells that you have some ungrateful person in your
household, (perhaps a servant,) or else a false-hearted friend. 41.

PAPER. To dream of smooth paper, is a good omen; but if it appears
rumpled, it will give you much pain. To dream of paper that is wet,
signifies success in love matters. 21, 18.

PARADE. To dream of a parade of soldiers, and that you are delighted
with the military display, foretells that some one will deceive you: to
a business man it is an omen of losses by bad debts or dull trade: to a
young girl it foreshadows a gay but false lover: to a married woman it
is a sign that her husband, though kind, will be false to his vows. 58,
1.

PARASOL. If a young woman dreams she has got a new parasol, it predicts
for her a new lover: if she imagines she has broken her parasol, her
lover (if she has one) will leave her; if not, then some male friend,
in whom she placed confidence or derived advantage, will fail her: to a
married woman, dreaming of a broken parasol is a very bad omen, as it
predicts ruin to her husband. 34.

PARDON. To dream of asking pardon for an offence, is a bad omen under
any circumstances, as it foretells humiliation and disgrace: for a
criminal to imagine, in his dream, that the Governor has pardoned him,
is a sign that he will not only not be pardoned, but that he will
suffer much remorse and unhappiness in his imprisonment. 19, 3, 40.

PARROT. To dream that you are pleased with the chattering of one of
these birds, is a sign that some deceitful person will flatter you: if
an engaged young girl has such a dream, she should look sharp to the
antecedents of her lover before marriage, as it is ten to one that he
is not worthy of her confidence: the dream may, however, point to some
other flatterer. 15, 2, 33.

PARTING. To dream of parting from friends with regret, is a sign of
disappointment: if a girl dreams that her lover is going away anywhere,
and she feels bad when he takes his leave, it predicts that he will not
 “go raving distracted with delight” the next time he comes to see her,
and she will consequently be disappointed at his supposed coolness; but
all this may not amount to anything more than to make her feel bad for
the time being. 4.

PARTNER. (_See Ball._) To dream that your partner in a dance slights
or snubs you, is a sign that some one is enamored of you: this applies
to either sex: if you dream of a particularly agreeable and attractive
partner, it shows that you will quarrel with somebody of the opposite
sex: for a man in business to dream of taking a partner, foretells that
he will be robbed. 17, 38.

PARTY. To dream of giving a large and sumptuous party to your friends,
is a sign of losses and poverty: if you imagine you go to such a party,
it foretells that you will be asked to assist some one in distress. 77,
18, 42.

PASTURE. (_See Cattle._) To dream of seeing cattle feeding in a
green and rich pasture, foretells thrift and wealth: if the grass is
sun-burnt and only green in patches, and the cattle look lean, the sign
is the reverse; and such a dream denotes short crops to farmers. 6, 11,
66.

PATCHES. For a woman to dream of patching the clothes of her husband or
children, is an excellent omen, as it denotes that each patch will be a
good lump of money brought into the family. 5.

PATENT RIGHT. To dream of procuring a patent for an invention of your
own, shows that you will never realize anything from it: if money is
to be made by it, some one else will get the benefit: if you dream of
getting a patent for some other person, it is a sign of good luck in a
speculation. 33, 17.

PATHS. To dream you are walking in a broad, good pathway, denotes
health and success; in love it shows you will meet with a sweetheart,
who will make you happy, but if the path is crooked it foretells
trouble to the dreamer. 44.

PAUPER. To dream that you visit the poor-house and see the inmates, is
a sign to a woman that she will bear many children, and to a man that
he will raise a large family, such a dream to a young girl foretells
that she will be apt to become a mother before she is a wife. 21.

PAWNBROKER. If you dream of pawning any of your goods at a
pawnbroker’s, provided you have never patronized such a place, it
foretells that fortune is about to smile on you, and if you take
advantage of the circumstance, you will surely get rich. To lazy and
shiftless people, such a dream would not be of much account. 4, 11, 22.

PEACHES. To dream of fine, ripe, yellow peaches, denotes that you will
get just so much yellow gold, which makes this dream a splendid one
for gold-diggers: if the peaches you dream about are very red, or look
small and wilted, it shows that your gold will turn out to be about
half copper, or that your luck will not amount to much. 17, 1, 9.

PEACOCK. To dream of this proud bird, is a sign of poverty; if you
imagine that he spreads his tail, and exhibits all his finery, so much
the worse. For a girl to dream of a peacock, shows that she will have
an empty-headed fop for a lover, who will turn out to be as poor as a
rat. 65, 54.

PEANUTS. To dream of an abundance of ground-nuts, or peanuts, shows
that you will be poor, but contented, healthy and happy. If a married
woman in the family-way dreams of them, it is a sign she will have a
boy. 11.

PEAS. To dream of eating green peas, is a sign of health; and if
you imagine that you eat crooked dry peas, it foretells both health
and thrift. If you dream of feeding any animal with dry peas, it
foreshadows good luck. 6.

PEARLS. To dream of these gems, denotes poverty and misery; if a
girl dreams that a lover gives her a piece of jewelry set in pearls,
it shows that he will never be well off; and if she imagines that
he presents her with a string or necklace of pearls, she may safely
calculate that he will turn out to be a wretchedly poor man. 56.

PEARS. To dream of ripe, mellow pears, portends elevation in life,
riches, honors, and constancy in love. If a woman with child dream of
them, she will have a daughter. To dream of unripe, choke-pears, is a
sign of misfortunes, and inconstancy in love. 33.

PEDDLER. If you dream of buying things of a peddler, it is a sign that
some one will cheat you, or that one of your debtors will mysteriously
disappear, which amounts to about the same thing: if a lady housekeeper
dreams this, let her look sharp that her servants do not rob or swindle
her in some way. 42, 13.

PEN-KNIFE. To dream of a pen-knife, is a bad omen, and foretells loss
in trade, attacks by thieves, and unfaithfulness in love. 29, 47.

PENS. To dream of writing with a steel pen, is a sign you will get
yourself into a bad scrape, by tattling about your friends and
neighbors. If the pen be gold, it foreshadows good news, and success
in business and love affairs. To dream you are making a quill pen, is
a sign you have many enemies, but that you will triumph over them, and
be successful in all you undertake. But this dream does not amount to
much, as it is only a  “set-off” to dreaming of a pen-knife, which is a
bad omen. 28, 6.

PEPPERS. To dream of picking pepper-pods, foretells to married people
smart children, if they have any. A girl who dreams this, will have
a smart man for a lover, but he will not pet her much either as a
sweetheart or wife. 9.

PERFUMERY. To dream of pleasant and delicate perfumes, foreshadows
sluttish habits in a woman: if a lover dreams of perfumes in connection
with the beloved object, it shows that when he marries, he will find
her to be a slut. A girl who dreams this, will be apt to have a
shiftless lover. 71, 1.

PERJURY. To dream that any one injures you by false swearing, or by
perjury in court, is a sign that you will discover some friend or
acquaintance to be dishonest, or guilty of a crime, or of mean conduct;
if a girl dream this, it is a similar omen relative to her lover. 52.

PET. If a girl dreams she has a pet animal of any kind, (a child, of
course, excepted,) it is a sign she will never marry: if she dreams of
a pet child, or one whom she adores, it foretells for her a prolific
marriage. 49.

PHYSIC. (_See Medicine._) In a dream-book published 1751, is this
prediction:  “If any man doth dreme he taketh much physicke, it
foretelleth a bad lyver, and a quarell with ye doctor; but a virgin
who dremeth this dreme, will marry ye doctor first, and quarell
thereafter.” 37, 8.

PIANO. To dream of hearing pleasant and lively tunes on the piano, is a
sign of thrift and domestic happiness; but if you dream of buying, or
that any one presents you with a piano, it foreshadows poverty; it is a
bad omen for a girl to dream she has got a new piano. 72.

PICKLES. If a girl dreams of eating pickles, it is a sign some old
bachelor will kiss her: if a young man dreams of pickles, he will
be beloved by a maid older than himself, and probably of a sour and
crabbed temper. 39, 2.

PICNIC. For a young man to dream of going with a pic-nic party into
the woods, is a sign that some silly girl will fall in love with him:
if a young girl dreams this, some vain fellow will probably pay her
attentions and compliments merely to gratify his own vanity. 37, 12.

PICTURES. To dream of seeing pictures is a sign of joy without profit.
48, 7.

PIES. To dream of eating pie is a sign that you will soon be in want.
To dream you are making pies is a sign of pleasure and happiness. 38.

PIGEONS. To dream of pigeons is a sign of content and delight, and
success in business. 39.

PIGS. To dream of seeing pigs is good; if you are in trade you will
have great increase in your business from foreign parts; if you are
in love, your sweetheart is thereby denoted to be of a good temper,
faithful and sincere to you, and that if you marry you will become
happy. 4, 12, 48.

PINEAPPLE. To dream of this fruit is a sign of gold; if you see an
abundance of it, you will receive plenty of gold soon after: a young
girl who dreams of pineapples will probably get a rich husband. 22, 9,
78.

PINKS. If a lady dreams of pinks, it foretells she will soon have a new
bonnet that she will be delighted with: if a gentleman dreams of them,
his wife or sweetheart will get a new bonnet that will please him.
That’s all. 34.

PINS. To dream of pins signifies that you will have small troubles all
through life, but no great disasters; to dream you find a pin is a sign
of success in business; if a girl dream she is pricked with a pin, she
must keep a sharp look out for her lover or she may get in trouble. 3,
71.

PIPE. To dream you smoke a pipe is an omen of success in business; if
the pipe goes out three times it is a sign you will meet with losses.
To dream you break a pipe foretells a quarrel that will injure your
prospects. 49, 7, 9.

PIRATE. To dream you are captured by pirates is a sign you will travel
in foreign countries and eventually make your fortune: if a girl dreams
this, it foretells that she will marry a foreigner who, dying, will
leave her a fortune. 6.

PISS-ABED. To dream that you wet the bed in your sleep, is a sign you
will lose something by fire: your house may not burn, but some article
will either fall in the fire or be damaged by it—perhaps your servant
may spoil some clothing while ironing. 5, 11, 55.

PISTOL. To dream of arming yourself with a pistol foretells that you
will lose _caste_, and perhaps become poor: if a girl dreams that her
lover carries a pistol, she may be sure that he is below her in social
life, and therefore an unpropitious or unsuitable match. 16, 21, 57.

PITCH. To dream that you get pitch on your person is a sign that some
one has been scandalizing you by telling lies: a girl who dreams this,
may be sure that her fair fame has been questioned somewhere. 54, 14.

PITCHER. (_See Jug._) To dream you drink water or milk from a pitcher
is a good omen, and signifies you will be prosperous in love and
business. To dream you spill anything out of a pitcher foretells losses
from the treachery of supposed friends, and to dream you break a
pitcher portends sickness, and accident while on a journey. To dream of
breaking a pitcher is also a sign of bankruptcy through carelessness.
49, 20.

PLAINS. To dream of being on a beautiful plain signifies health,
happiness and riches, but portends some crosses in love. 4, 12, 48.

  Dreams of wandering over plains,
  Walking in cross ways and lanes,
  And being in thick woods quite lost,
  Declare that lovers shall be crost.

PLANTS. (_See Blossom._) To dream of healthy, thriving plants is a
good omen, as it foretells success in life, and smart children: such a
dream is an excellent one for lovers, as it denotes an early and happy
marriage. 43, 14, 7.

PLASTER. For a girl to dream of having a plaster on her person is a
sign that some one will offer her an insult, or perhaps make an attempt
upon her chastity: if a man dreams this, the same will probably happen
to his wife or sweetheart. 72, 8.

PLENTY. (_See Abundance._)

PLOW. (_See Husbandry._)

PLOWING. For a farmer to dream that he is plowing on smooth and even
ground, denotes heavy crops, and good luck generally: if he plows up
stones it is all the better, but if his plow gets hitched into a rock
or stump, it denotes vexation and trouble with his good luck. 41.

PLUMS. To dream of an abundance of this fruit is a sign of health but
yet you are liable to lose your life by an accident: if a girl dreams
she is presented with plums, it foretells her early death. 36, 14, 77.

POCKET-BOOK. To dream of finding a pocket-book full of money is a sign
of riches, but if it contains no money, it foretells a disappointment:
if you dream you lose your pocket-book, it foreshadows success in
business. 19, 78.

POET. If any young person should be so silly as to dream of writing
poetry, it foretells poverty; and for one to dream of having a
poetical lover or sweetheart, is a sign that they will fall in love
with a fool. 64, 50.

POISON. To dream that you are poisoned is a sign you will get into bad
or unworthy company: if you imagine that any friend or acquaintance is
poisoned, it is a similar omen as regards them: if, in your dream, you
think any one has given you poison to murder you, it foretells that
some base proposal will be made to you. 3, 9.

POLE-CAT. If a man dream he sees one, he will marry a beautiful woman;
if a woman, she will marry a handsome man. If this delightful animal
make an attack on you it is a sign you will suffer from the slander of
enemies. 68, 2.

POLICE. If any respectable person dreams of being arrested by police
officers, it is a sign that some distinguished honor will be conferred
on him: if a young girl should dream that policemen took her lover into
custody, she will hear of his advancement in the world. 46, 30.

POLITE. To dream of polite people is a sign that a stranger will visit,
or be introduced to you: if a girl dreams that her beau is stiff and
formal in addressing her, it foretells that she will soon have a new
admirer. 61.

POOR. To dream of poverty is a sign of good luck, but if you imagine
you are so poor as to be induced to beg, it foretells that some one
will either insult you or hurt your feelings, but yet your luck will
not be impaired. 8, 2.

PORK. (_See Bacon and Ham._)

PORTRAIT. To dream of having your portrait taken, is a sign some one
will compliment your good looks; but if you are dissatisfied and think
it a bad likeness, the compliment will run in a contrary direction, and
you will be called frightfully ugly-looking behind your back. 12.

POUND. For a farmer to dream that any of his cattle are taken to pound,
is a sign that they will increase: if he dreams of seeing strange
cattle in a pound, it foretells that he will soon buy some. 19, 55.

PRAISE. To dream that any one praises or flatters you, is a sign of
scandal: if a girl dreams that her lover praises her good looks or
amiability, she bad better discard him as a false-hearted person who
cares nothing about her, but is merely flattering his own vanity. 35,
17.

PRAYER. To dream of prayer, or of joining in a prayer with others, is a
sign you will ask a favor of some one who will refuse you: if you dream
of hearing prayers at church, or in any public place, it shows that
you will be requested to do something which you will refuse to do, and
thereby make an enemy. 34, 77.

PREGNANCY. For a woman to dream that she is pregnant when she is not,
is a sign of some special good fortune; she will either have a handsome
present, or else her husband will be lucky in some business transaction
and give her a part of the money: if a girl dreams this, it foretells
that she will get married about as sudden as if the dream were a
reality. 4, 11, 44.

PRESENT. (_See Gift._) To dream of receiving a present, is usually
a sign of disappointment; but if a married woman dreams that she is
presented with fruit, it shows that she will soon become pregnant: if
a girl imagines she is presented by her lover with gold jewelry, it
predicts that he covets the possession of her person rather than her
heart. 64, 21.

PRESERVES. To dream that you make or eat them, foretells the
acquisition of much money and property, also health and happiness. 3,
33, 9.

PRETTY GIRL. For a young man to dream of admiring a pretty girl, is a
sign he will marry a simpleton: if a girl dreams she has a nice and
pretty-looking lover, she will be apt to take up with a putty-head.
Here is an ancient rhyming prediction: 4, 13.

  To dream you love a girl who’s pretty,
    Foretells that you’ll in sorrow part;
  But if you dream she’s wise and witty,
    She’ll be the darling of your heart!

PRICK. If a lady dreams of pricking her finger while sewing, she must
put it in her mouth on awaking, and make a wish, and she will realize
it within one month, provided it relates to love matters: a wish of any
other kind will doubtless come true some time or other, as the omen is
an excellent one: if a lady dreams she pricks herself with a pin, the
omen is not so good. (_See Pin and Briar._) 498.

PRIEST. To dream that a priest offers you service, or visits you for
any purpose, is a sign that you will be robbed; if you dream you go to
one for advice, it foretells that some misfortune will overtake you:
any dream about a priest is a bad one. 39.

PRISON. (_See Jail._) To dream you are put in prison, foretells that
honor awaits you: but this omen does not apply to rogues or dishonest
people, though such a dream by them favors their desires: if a girl
dreams that her lover has gone to prison, she will soon hear of his
advancement. 46.

PRIZE. To dream of drawing a prize in the lottery, is a sign of poverty
and misery: if you dream that you bought a lottery ticket with a
majority of odd numbers on it, you may perchance be successful with
those numbers, but even numbers are worthless in dreams. To dream of
getting prizes in any way is a bad omen. 4, 11, 44.

PROCESSION. To dream of seeing a long military or civic procession,
is a sign that some of your friends will come to poverty and ask your
assistance; if you imagine that you are in such a procession yourself,
it foretells that you will either make a loss, or be very short of
money. 2.

PROFIT. If a man dreams that he made a large and liberal profit by any
transaction or speculation, it foretells losses and disaster. 48, 16.

PROMISE. To dream of broken promises on the part of a friend, is a sign
that he will confer a benefit on you: if a girl dreams that her lover
has broken his promise to marry, it foreshadows a speedy performance of
the ceremony. 3.

PROPERTY. To dream of the loss of property, is a sign of good luck, and
you may calculate to acquire as much as you dreamed was lost, for such
dreams always work contrariwise. 45, 1, 14.

PROSTITUTE. For a young man to dream of associating with prostitutes,
is a sign of poverty and disgrace: if he dreams of seeing these girls
anywhere, it foretells misfortune or bad luck: for a girl to dream of
them, is a sign that her chastity is in danger. 35, 9.

PROUD. To dream of proud people who disgust you, foretells that you
will rise in the world: a girl who dreams this of her lover, will
probably marry a rich or distinguished man. 3, 32, 13.

PUDDING. To dream of a hard-boiled plum pudding, or a hard roll of
pudding of any kind, is a sign you will be invited to a dinner party;
but if you imagine the pudding looks soft and mussy, it foretells that
you will go to some entertainment where there will be a row. 19, 70.

PULPIT. If any one dreams of going into a pulpit, it is a sign he or
she will visit a place of disrepute, as such dreams work contrariwise:
for a girl to dream that she assists in ornamenting or dressing a
pulpit, foretells that she will do some act that she afterwards
regrets, because of an unworthy person being connected therewith. 62.

PUMP. Dreaming of a pump is an excellent omen: if you dream of
pumping clear water from one, it shows that you will have good luck
in business, or in a speculation: pumping dirty water is a sign of
sickness. 29, 4, 20.

PUNCH. To dream of making this beverage, or of drinking it, is a sign
of poverty or disgrace; if a girl dreams that her lover treats her to
punch, she had better discard him at once, as he will undoubtedly turn
out to be a poor and shiftless fellow. 19, 32.

PUNISHMENT. (_See Stick._) To dream of punishing a child, foretells
good fortune to the victim, and honors to yourself. For any one to
dream of being punished by whipping, is a sign they will rise in the
world, or be honored for some act. 7.

PURSE. To dream of finding an empty purse, shadows forth
disappointment; if the purse has plenty of money in it, your luck will
be excellent—the more money, the better fortune: if it has in it large
gold pieces, or large bills, you will become rich either by marriage or
inheritance. 78.

PUTTY. To dream of putty, is a sign of poverty: puttying up holes
foretells losses—the larger the hole, the more extensive the loss. If
you are putting glass into a window with putty, it foretells that you
will soon remove into a meaner place than you now occupy. 6, 4.

PUZZLE. To dream of bothering your brains with a puzzle, foretells
frivolity; if you succeed, you will do something that works to your
disadvantage: if you imagine that the puzzle puzzles you, it is a sign
that some silly person will do you an unintentional injury. 21, 17.

QUAIL. To dream of these birds is a good omen: if you imagine you see
young quail feeding, it is a sign of thrift, particularly to farmers:
to be successful in shooting them in the proper season, also foretells
good luck and success in any undertaking. 76, 14.

QUAKER. To dream of business intercourse with genuine broad-brims,
is a sign you will make a bad bargain. If, in your dream, you see a
concourse of quakers, it foretells that you will not be fortunate in
business matters. This omen is supposed to be predicated on the fact
that the Quakers monopolize all the good chances when they are around.
24, 30.

QUARREL. To dream of quarreling with a stranger, is a sign you will
make a new friend or acquaintance; if you imagine that you quarrel with
a friend, it shows that you will soon have a pleasant and agreeable
time with him: lovers who dream of quarrels, will be apt to bill and
coo harder than ever. 2, 12, 24.

QUEEN. For a man to dream of seeing a queen, foretells the loss of
money, either by robbery or bad debts: if he is presented to a queen,
the dream is still worse in respect to losses. 39, 60.

QUICKSILVER. (_See Metals._)

QUILTING. If a lady dreams of going to a quilting party, it foretells
for her and her family thrift and good luck: gentlemen, who dream of
being much entertained at such a party, will have the very best success
in love matters. 71, 54.

QUINCES. To dream of quinces, is an excellent omen: if you imagine you
are gathering quinces from trees full of fine-looking, yellow ones, it
predicts that you will get just so much yellow gold, which will be a
fortune. 49, 6.

QUOITS. If a man dreams he is playing quoits, it is a sign he will soon
have a quarrel. If a woman dreams she is playing quoits, it foretells
she will have much trouble through life. To dream of quoits, is not a
good omen to lovers. 57, 3.

RABBITS. To dream of these animals, foretells many small children: if
a newly married woman dreams of them it is a sign that she will have
twins or triplets within a year: such a dream will not be very pleasant
to a young girl unless she means to marry right sudden, for rabbits do
not predict anything else but breeding children. 44, 13.

RACCOON. To dream of simply treeing a raccoon, is a good omen, for you
will probably either gain a sum of money, or have it left to you as a
legacy: if you imagine that you shoot the animal, and he falls to the
ground, this will spoil the luck; you should stop dreaming as soon as
the ’coon is up the tree. 61, 12.

RACES. (_See Run._) To dream of running a race on foot and winning
it, is a sign of success in any undertaking—losing it, foretells
disappointment. If you dream of going to a horse-race, it predicts
poverty and shiftlessness. 46, 7.

RADISHES. To dream of this vegetable, signifies that a secret will be
discovered, which will occasion a muss in the family. To a girl, it is
a sign she will lose her beau, and to a lover, it foreshadows he will
be  “cut out” by some other nice young man. 38, 13.

RAFFLE. Raffling in your dream is the same as gambling; it foretells
poverty and disgrace: to dream of raffling for poultry is a sign that
your family (if you have one) will want bread; if you are single, it
shows that you will be apt to get seedy and loaferish. 8, 44.

RAFT. To dream of seeing a raft foretells a journey—the longer the
raft, the more extensive the line of travel: if you dream of sailing
on a raft, it is a sign you will travel, with good success, in distant
countries. 10.

RAGE. (_See Anger._) If you dream that you are in a great rage in
consequence of a mishap, or disagreeable event, it is a sign that some
pleasant episode in connection therewith will occur to put you in an
excellent humor, as such dreams work contrariwise. 44, 16.

RAGGED. To dream that your clothes are ragged, indicates that a young
girl will banter you: if, in your dream, you see ragged people, it is a
sign that you will suffer ridicule at your next meeting with a party of
ladies and gentlemen. Rags and ridicule go together in dreams. 19.

RAILROAD. To dream of traveling by railroad, foretells to people who
keep house that they will break up their establishment: to young
persons it indicates the loss of their home: to lovers it is a sign
that if they marry they will not keep house long, if at all. 3, 11, 33.

RAIN. To dream of a gentle rain is a good omen, as it foretells success
in any undertaking: if you dream of a violent rain-storm accompanied
by wind and thunder and lightning, it predicts much trouble and
misfortune, though ultimate success in your undertakings. 21, 72.

RAINBOW. It is an excellent dream to imagine you see a brilliant
rainbow—the brighter the better: it denotes health and general
prosperity: to lovers it foretells a happy marriage, and riches. A
young girl who dreams of a rainbow will either get an agreeable lover
or a present. 45.

RAKING. For a girl to dream of raking newly mown hay, is a sign she
will be married before the hay is eaten: young fellows who dream of
raking hay with their sweethearts had better get ready their necks for
the matrimonial noose, as they are past praying for. 4, 11.

RAM. To dream that a ram runs at you for butting purposes, shadows
forth to a young man that his society will be coveted by the girls, and
that he will be fortunate in love matters generally: if a girl dreams
this, she will probably have her choice of lovers, as all the young
fellows around there will fall in love with her: if the ram succeeds in
butting her, she will surely be taken captive and brought as Cupid’s
prisoner into the matrimonial ranks. 19.

RAPE. If a female (married or single) dreams of an outrage on her
person, (whether attempted, or successful,) it is a sign that some one
of the opposite sex is in love with her: if she is married, the dream
alludes to some man other than her husband. Such dreams bode no good.
31.

RASPBERRIES. To dream of an abundance of this fruit is a sign of health
and riches: if you dream you are eating raspberries, it shows that you
will be engaged in some enterprise that will bring you in a good deal
of cash, most of which will be spent lavishly. 3, 66.

RATS. (_See Trap and Mouse._) To dream of rats is a sign that thieves
are around: if you see any of these animals, it shows that some friend
will be robbed, but if you hear them gnawing, you will suffer a loss
from robbery yourself. If a girl, who has a lover, dreams of rats, she
had better be careful and not let him be too free with her person, or
he may rob her of that which cannot be restored. 54, 21.

RAVEN. (_See Crow._)

READING. To dream you are reading, indicates you will be successful in
your love; in trade, it is particularly propitious; but if it appear to
be painful or irksome to read, it signifies that you shall not succeed
without exertion, 65, 2.

REAPING. (_See Harvest._) To dream of reaping grain is an excellent
omen, as it foretells thrift and abundance, as well as plenty of money
in gold; this applies to a prolific field of ripe yellow grain; if the
grain is meagre and looks rusty, the sign is entirely different, as it
betokens scarcity and penury. 4, 11, 44.

RELATIONS. If you dream of being annoyed at home by your relations,
it is a sign that you will be the subject of much scandal: if, on the
contrary, you imagine that your relatives visit you and give you great
pleasure by their society, it foretells that you are talked about a
good deal, but always with respect and veneration. 70.

RELIGIOUS. For any one to dream of becoming religious, foretells that
they will be cheated or swindled in some way, as such a dream works
contrariwise: if you dream that a minister, or any religious person,
exhorts you to become pious, you had better look out sharp, for some
rogue is around, contriving how to victimize you. 54.

RENT. To dream of paying your rent foretells that you will get some
money unexpectedly; but if you dream that you owe it, without having
the money to pay, and are worried in consequence, it foreshadows a loss
of property. 3.

REPRIEVE. If a criminal under sentence of death dream of a reprieve or
pardon, he may make up his mind that it is all over with him; and if
any friend, who is interested in his fate, dreams this, it amounts to
about the same thing. 76, 5.

REPTILE. To dream of any animal that is called a reptile, such as
snakes, toads, alligators, and the like, is a sign of a quarrel: if you
imagine you are bitten, it shows that you will come out second best,
or badly injured either in person or reputation. If a girl dreams of a
reptile, let her look sharp that her lover don’t play her false. 34, 3.

RESCUE. If you dream of rescuing anyone from peril, it is a sign you
will rise in the world, either by means of increased wealth, or new
honors: to dream that you are rescued from drowning or from any other
mode of death, shows that you will go into some successful business
speculation with a partner. To lovers, such a dream foretells a speedy
and happy union. 64, 9.

RESIGN. If a person who holds an office, or a trust of any kind,
dreams of resigning, it is a sign of advancement: to any one who cannot
be advanced, it shows that he will rise above his present position in
society. 41, 17.

RESUSCITATE. To dream of resuscitating a drowned person, foretells that
you will engage in some enterprise that attracts public attention: if
the person thus brought to life is a female, it shadows forth marriage
with a lady of public fame. 16, 9, 78.

REVENGE. To dream of revenging an injury, is a sign of disgrace: if, in
your dream, you imagine that you have caused any one to be locked up in
prison from motives of revenge, it predicts that you yourself will be
imprisoned for some degrading act. 74, 50.

REVIVAL. To dream of a religious revival, or of being where a great
many people are holding a revival meeting, is a sign that you will go
into a disreputable public place and lose _caste_: if you take part in
the meeting, it foretells that you will come to disgrace, as all such
dreams work contrariwise. 13, 57.

REWARD. To dream of receiving a reward for any act which is a public
benefit, such as detecting a criminal, is a sign that you will have
honors conferred upon you: if you dream of getting a reward for finding
money or other property, it foreshadows good fortune and riches. 41.

RHEUMATISM. To dream of this painful disease, is an omen of health:
if you imagine a friend is thus afflicted, it shows that he will soon
offer to do you a favor, or benefit you in some way. 52, 16.

RHINOCEROS. To dream of this East India animal, denotes success to the
man of business, but disappointment in love matters; but to dream they
injure you, is unfavorable to the dreamer. If you dream you see one
dead, you’ll soon leave a relative. 47.

RIBBONS. For a girl to dream that she has got new, and beautiful
ribbons on her bonnet or dress, is a sign some one will flatter her to
her disadvantage: if she does not like the ribbon, it shows that she
will hear of some scandal relative to herself; and if the ribbon is
red, the scandal will impeach her chastity. 39, 6.

RICE. To dream of eating rice, denotes health: if you imagine that you
see large quantities of rice, it foretells to one who does not live in
a rice country, a successful and pleasant journey; and to those who
live there, it predicts gain and riches. 12, 2, 24.

RICH. To dream you are rich or that you have inherited a fortune, is
a sign of poverty and bad luck; but if you imagine that some one pays
you large sums of money enough to make you rich, your dream will be
realized so far that you will acquire property. If a person dreams that
a legacy is paid to him in money, it has an entirely different meaning
from a dream that you are enriched from a legacy, but do not see the
money. 15, 3.

RIDING. (_See Carriage, Stage-coach, and Gig._) To dream you are
riding, if it be with a woman, is unfortunate: in trade, decay of
business; in love, disappointments; but if it be with men, then, by
care, the reverse of these things will happen. Riding in a railcar, or
a stage, foretells success in business matters. 6, 12, 72.

RING. For a lady to dream that a gentleman presents her with a ring, or
that she has a ring belonging to a gentleman, is a sign of a wedding.
If a young man dreams that he has got a lady’s ring, the omen is
similar. To dream of finding a ring, foretells that the person finding
it will marry within a year. 4, 20.

RIOT. To dream of a public tumult or riot, is a sign of scarcity and
bad crops to farmers, and dull business to tradesmen and mechanics:
if any friend or relative is injured in the riot, you or they will
probably suffer from misfortune, but if they are successful and pacify
the crowd, it foretells that you will overcome your difficulties. 2.

RIVAL. For a lover to dream that he has a rival who annoys him, is a
sign that he is in high favor with his sweetheart; such a dream to a
young lady has a similar omen, and she has only to name the happy day
to settle the matter to her mind. 1, 70.

RIVER. To dream of crossing a large and clear river, foretells
a splendid fortune: if the water is muddy or riled, it predicts
difficulties, but they will be overcome provided you get safe over the
river without accident. If a girl dreams this, it is a sign she will
travel somewhere and get a rich husband. 34, 20.

ROBBERY. (_See Thief and Stealing._)

ROBIN. To dream of seeing robins around your house, is a good omen, as
it foretells abundance to farmers and success to any one; if you do not
see them, but hear them trilling, it foreshadows sickness, and perhaps
death. 6.

ROCKET. To dream of seeing rockets flying in the air, foretells joy and
gladness at some event about to happen: to married people it denotes
the birth of a child, or the marriage of a daughter if they have one
old enough. If a young girl dreams of seeing a rocket, she needn’t
trouble herself further, as her speedy marriage is certain. 15.

ROCKING-CHAIR. (_See Chair._)

ROCKS. (_See Mountain._)

ROOSTER. (_See Cock._) If a girl dreams of hearing a cock crow, it
foretells that she will soon have a new lover; if a lover dreams this,
it is a sign that he has a formidable rival: if a married man or woman
dreams of roosters, it shows that some outsider is enamored of the
wife. 10, 19.

ROSE. To dream of roses is a sign of troubles: the old saying that
every rose has its thorn, is exemplified in such a dream, because every
rose you see brings along a trouble: dreaming of white roses signifies
a marriage which will bring much vexation. 47, 9.

ROSEMARY. To the married, denotes loss of their mates and children; to
the lover, trouble through his or her sweetheart. 49, 7.

ROTTEN. To dream of rotten things of any kind (except eggs), foretells
sickness and death: to imagine that you handle rotten eggs, foreshadows
disgrace. 35.

ROWING. To dream of rowing a boat in clear water, is a sign of
good luck generally: if the water is muddy, it shows trouble and
difficulties which may be overcome; if a lover dreams of rowing a boat
with his lady-love in it, he will doubtless make a happy match, 20.

RUDDER. To dream of a broken rudder in a boat or vessel in which you
are sailing, foretells that one of the persons who you imagine are in
the boat, will be drowned, or come to a sudden death. 27, 75.

RUIN. If you dream that you are looking at old ruins, or castles, or
buildings, it is a sign you will travel in distant countries: to dream
of the ruins of a house that has been burnt down, foretells that you
will experience a loss of property: if, in your dream, you see the
ruins of a house that has fallen down, it denotes the death of a friend
or acquaintance. 5, 12, 60.

RUN. (_See Race._) To dream of running swift, is a sign of good success
in your undertakings; but if you stumble or fall, it denotes accidents
or misfortune: if you imagine that you see people run, while you are
still, it foretells disappointment. 7.

RUST. To dream of rust is a bad omen: rusty knives, or tools of any
kind, denote the destruction of property: rusty pails or utensils are
so many signs of poverty. 54.

RYE. To dream of this grain is a sign you will be fortunate in money
matters; it also foretells success in love affairs: to the married it
foreshadows domestic happiness. 69.

SAFFRON. To dream of gathering saffron, or of drinking a decoction
of the herb, is a sign of health and wealth: if the flowers that you
gather look clear and healthy, it foretells that you will get just so
much gold. 19, 24.

SAILING. To dream of fair sailing on clear water, is an excellent omen,
as it foretells abundance and success: heavy winds that endanger your
boat, or muddy waters, point out difficulties which will probably be
overcome. (_See Boat, Yacht and Ship._) 20.

SAUSAGES. To dream of eating fried sausages, foretells that you
will come in contact with some person who is very poor, and will be
disagreeable to you: a girl who dreams this, will be very sure to get a
shiftless and needy lover, and perhaps marry him if she is in much of a
hurry to get married. 38, 16.

SAWING. To dream of sawing wood, or boards, foretells that you will do
something that you will afterwards regret: if a young fellow dreams
this, he will probably offer some indignity to his sweetheart, which he
will find it hard work to get overlooked. 3, 17, 55.

SCAFFOLD. To dream of going upon a high scaffold, shows that you will
rise in the world: if, in your dream, you imagine that you fall from a
scaffold, or from any high place, it shadows forth a misfortune that
will make you poorer: a girl who dreams of climbing upon a scaffold,
will positively marry a rich man, or one of distinction, who is far
above her in position. 33, 7.

SCALDED. To dream of being scalded with hot water, is usually a sign of
injuries by the elements; it may foretell losses by floods, by fire, or
by winds, or by thunder-storms: if you dream of scalding your tongue
with hot tea, it is a sign that you will scandalize a neighbor with
some ill-natured remark. 3, 12, 36.

SCALES. To dream you are weighing any article, is a good omen, and
signifies that you will be happy and long-lived; but to dream you see
another using the scales, is a sign you will be ruined by law-suits.
68, 40.

SCARCITY. To dream of a scarcity of anything is a sign that some of
the article dreamed about is on its way to you; as if a farmer were to
dream of a scarcity of hay, it shows that his next hay crop will be
very abundant; or, if a girl should dream of a scarcity of compliments,
she will probably be overwhelmed by them from gentlemen, when she next
goes into company. 27, 9.

SCHOOL. To dream of attending school, is a sign of advancement and good
fortune: if you dream of studying, and succeed well, it shadows forth
that you will rise to a position in society above your present one: if
you find it difficult to learn, you will have trouble in getting along,
but will rise at last. 42, 72.

SCISSORS. To dream of a pair of scissors, is a sign of a marriage; if
a girl dreams of them she will positively be married within a year:
to a married woman such a dream is a bad omen, as it denotes some gay
seducer will flatter her, and probably succeed in enticing her from the
path of virtue. Here is an old prediction in rhyme: 47.

  To dream of scissors—a full pair,
    Tells a fair maid that soon she’ll marry;
  But to a wife it doth declare
    Her chastity will e’en miscarry!

SCOLD. For a man to dream he has a scolding, shrewish wife, is a sign
that he will be lucky in everything he undertakes: if a lover dreams
that his sweetheart scolds at him, it is a sign that her love is strong
and unalterable. 65, 16.

SCRATCH. To dream of having your face scratched, is a sign that
somebody has been disparaging your good looks: if a girl imagines in
her dream that she has scratched herself with a pin, it foretells that
scandal is afloat relative to her conduct with her lover, or some other
gentleman. 3.

SCREW. To dream of a small screw, is a good sign, and indicates success
in all you undertake; but to dream of a large bed-screw portends
trouble brought about by love affairs. 4, 11, 44.

SCYTHE. (_See Husbandry._)

SEA. To dream of going to sea in a ship or steamer, is a sign that you
will be fortunate in money matters: storms and perils at sea foretell
difficulties which may be overcome: if you dream you are seasick, it
denotes continued health. If a girl dreams of going to sea, and having
a pleasant voyage, she will marry rich, and love her husband; but
storms and perils point to quarrels with him. 6.

SECRET. If a young girl dreams that a friend has intrusted her with an
important secret, it is a sign that the friend will become her enemy:
if her lover tells her a secret, they will surely quarrel within a
week; if she dreams of disclosing a secret to a friend, she will be
much vexed at some scandal that is afloat respecting her. 4, 2, 8.

SEDUCER. If a young woman dreams that her lover’s conduct is that of a
gay seducer, she will find him to be very sincere in his attachment:
a married woman who dreams that she is over-persuaded by a seducer
to yield to his desires, will come to much honor, as such dreams
work contrariwise. If a man dreams of seducing a virtuous girl, it
foreshadows that he will be disgraced. 35, 8.

SEGAR. (_See Tobacco._) To dream you are smoking a segar, is a sign you
will have misfortunes and troubles with your business matters: if you
imagine the fire of your segar goes out, it is a sign you will meet
with losses: in love matters this dream is a bad omen. 49, 7, 9.

SEPARATION. If a woman dreams that she is about to live separate from
her husband, it promises that she will shortly find herself in the
family way: such a dream to a man is a sign that some woman or girl,
other than his wife, is in love with him. 26, 17.

SERVANTS. (_See Domestics._) To dream that you are robbed by your
servants, is a sign that some one among them that you think the most
of is deceiving you: if, in your dream, you imagine you have had your
silver stolen by a servant, it shows that you will have a difficulty,
and discharge one who will be replaced by a dishonest person. 71, 40,
11.

SHARK. To dream of seeing a shark in the water, is an excellent omen,
as it foretells that you will escape a great danger that menaces you:
if you dream of capturing the shark, you will soon thereafter get a big
lump of money. Catching fish of any kind foretells money-getting. 31.

SHAVE. For a man to dream that he is shaving, is a sign he will get in
debt: to dream that any one shaved you in a bargain, foretells that
some debt will be paid to you which you had given up as lost. 5, 7, 54.

SHAWL. If a girl dreams of getting a new shawl, it foretells that she
will soon have a new beau who will be very attentive and affable. 3, 19.

SHEEP. To dream of large flocks of sheep, is a sign of thrift and
abundance, particularly to farmers, to whom the omen promises large
crops: if many of the sheep have young lambs, it foretells domestic
happiness and an excellent crop of children. 12, 5, 60.

SHELL. (_See Oysters and Clams._) To dream you find an empty shell is a
sign you will meet with losses in business, but if, in your dream, you
imagine the shell to be full, it foretells you will be successful in
all your undertakings. If you dream you are opening any kind of shell
fish for others to eat it foreshadows that you will have plenty of
funds. 19, 53.

SHERIFF. If you dream the sheriff is after you with a writ, or a
warrant, and that you dodge and escape him, it is a sign of bad luck
and losses; but if he arrests and locks you up in prison, it foretells
that some good fortune is coming. Soon after such a dream you will be
lucky in anything you undertake. 62, 21.

SHIFT. (_See Linen and Smock._)

SHIP. To dream of seeing a ship under full sail, while you stand on the
shore, is a sign you will soon fall in love with a pretty girl, who
will favor your addresses; but if you see this ship while you are on
the water in some other vessel, it shows that your sweetheart will be
jealous of you. To dream of being shipwrecked and losing your property,
foretells good luck in business matters, but quarrels in love affairs.
29, 8.

SHIRT. To dream that your shirt is ragged and without buttons, is
a sign of poverty: if you imagine that you have a new shirt, with
a stylish bosom, it foretells some disagreeable adventure in which
your self-esteem will be keenly wounded, such as being placed in a
ridiculous position before ladies, or before company in public. 44, 18.

SHOES. (_See Boots._) If you dream that one of your shoes has a hole
in it, it foretells that your sweetheart will offend you by favoring
a supposed rival: if a girl dreams this, her lover will be jealous
of her: for a young man to dream that he has lost a shoe-string, is
a sign that he will be kissed by a lady with whom he had no previous
acquaintance. 33.

SHROUD. (_See Corpse._) To dream of a shroud is a sign of a wedding:
to see, in your dream, a woman laid out in her shroud, foretells to a
young person that he or she will either be present at a marriage, or
will become a victim of Cupid’s archery. 39, 11.

SICKNESS. (_See Disease._) If you dream you have had a long sickness,
and are recovering, it foretells bad luck and difficulties: should
you imagine that you are sick and are going to die, the omen is the
reverse, for some good fortune awaits you: if a girl dreams that she is
sick abed, and her lover visits her, it foretells a smooth courtship
and happy marriage. 2.

SILKS. For a lady to dream of silks and satins, and that she is having
fine dresses made of those fabrics, foretells poverty and want: if she
imagines that she is presented with a plain cheap dress, and is pleased
with the present, it is a sign she will have some excellent luck; but
if she dislikes it, it shows that she will refuse an offer that will
cause her after regrets. 8, 7, 56.

SILVER. (_See Metals._)

SINGING. To dream of singing solemn music in a choir, is a sign of
the death of a young girl who is your esteemed friend or relative: to
lovers, such a dream foretells the loss of sweethearts: if you imagine
you are singing some lively tune by yourself, it is a sign of sorrow,
though it may not be connected with any death. 34, 18.

SINGLE. If a married woman dreams that she is single, and that
attentions are being paid to her by a beau, it foretells that her
husband has become captivated by a new love, and will probably be false
to his vows: the omen is similar to a married man who dreams that he is
either a bachelor or widower. 69, 72.

SISTER. (_See Brothers._) To dream you see your sister denotes a speedy
death in your family, and that the dreamer will be long-lived: if you
are in love, it is a favorable omen. 24, 8.

SKATING. To dream of skating over smooth ice, and gliding along without
much effort, is a sign of success and good luck: if you are skating
with ladies, it foretells that your love matters will go smoothly; if
the ice be broken or lumpy, it denotes difficulties; and if you imagine
you fall down, you will probably experience a misfortune or have great
trouble. 4, 7, 28.

SKY. A clear sky denotes a marriage, speedy, and happy; a red sky,
increase of wealth; if you ascend into the sky, you may look for much
honor; a cloudy sky shows misfortune. 2, 11, 24.

SLAUGHTER-HOUSE. To dream of being in an empty slaughter-house, shows
that you are in danger, but can avoid it by precaution. To see animals
slaughtered is a good sign, if the blood flow freely; if the blood does
not flow, you will meet with some accident. 26, 12.

SLAVE. To dream that a favorite slave has become ungrateful, and run
away, is a sign that some one has been tampering with him or her,
but without effect; if, in your dream, you imagine that one of your
favorite negroes has been impertinent or neglectful, and is to be
flogged, and that you feel bad about it, it shows that some one will
try to injure you through the medium of your slaves, and you should
therefore look sharp to the characters of white people around. 62, 4.

SLEIGH-RIDE. To dream of a sleigh-ride, where the sleighing is good,
and the sleigh glides free and noiseless, is an excellent omen, as it
foretells success and good fortune generally, particularly to farmers:
but if you imagine the sleighing is poor, and that the runners screech
on the ground, it foretells trouble and unhappiness. Young men who
dream of sleigh-riding with girls, stopping at taverns, drinking,
getting the girls boozy, and then performing unnamable pranks, are thus
forewarned that they will be poor and shiftless, as such dreams are
certain omens of misery and disgrace. 67, 46.

SLIDING. (_See Ice._) To dream of sliding on smooth ice, foretells good
luck: if a girl dreams that a young man assists her in sliding, and
that she enjoys it, she will soon get an agreeable lover: ragged or wet
ice, or holes in the ice, foreshadow difficulties. If a girl dreams
of falling down on the ice, and that her lover falls with her, and
overtops her, they may as well go to the parson at once, and have the
knot tied, as it is a sure thing to happen. 4, 28.

SMALL-POX. (_See Sores._) To dream that you have this disease,
foretells health and good fortune: if a lover should be so ungallant,
as to imagine that his sweetheart is thus afflicted, it is a sign that
he will marry a great beauty; if she happens to be a beauty, it will be
all right, of course; if not, he will look out for number two. 41, 32.

SMOCK. (_See Linen._) If a girl dreams that she has a ragged
undergarment, it foretells that some rich greenhorn will try to seduce
her, and failing, will offer her marriage: if she dreams that she has
a good supply of beautiful worked undergarments, it is a sign that she
will sigh in vain for a lover; if she imagines that a gentleman gives
her a new smock, she will be in danger of losing her chastity. 12.

SMOKE. To dream of being in a room full of smoke, foretells that you
will engage in an angry controversy, and perhaps quarrel: lovers who
dream of smoke, will nose out the fire when they next meet, and it will
prove to be either one of anger or of lust. 76, 5.

SNAKE. To dream of snakes is a sign of an enemy, or that some one is
slandering you; it also denotes quarrels and angry disputes: if an
engaged young lady dreams of them, she had better ascertain positively
whether her lover is all right before she marries him. 47, 50.

SNEEZE. To dream you sneeze, is a sign of long life. 55.

SNOW. (_See Sleigh-Ride and Thaw._) To dream that the ground is covered
with clean, white snow, is a sign of joy and pleasure: if you walk in
it, it foretells that you will go on a pleasant journey; to eat it,
denotes health: if the snow is dirty, or melted in patches, you will
have troubles, but they will not amount to much. To dream of a regular
storm, is a sign you will be very successful in all your love and
business affairs. 21, 67, 46.

SNUFF. (_See Tobacco._)

SNUFFERS. (_See Candles._) To dream of snuffing out a candle, is a sign
of a death in the family: if you imagine that you snuff it too short,
without putting it out, it foretells that you will do something that
will make a female friend shed tears. 40.

SOAP. Signifies trouble in business, but it will soon depart. 66, 3, 11.

SOLDIER’S DRUM. (_See Zouave, Parade and Procession._)

SORES. To dream of your body being covered with blotches, shows that a
great fortune will fall to you. To have the arms full of sores, shows
ill success in business. 19, 74.

SOW. To dream of a sow with a large litter of pigs, denotes abundance
to a farmer, but is a sign of ill-health to a tradesman or mechanic: if
a girl dreams this, it foretells that she will soon marry a man in bad
health. 4, 12, 48.

SPIDER. To dream that you see a spider coming toward you, is a sign
that some one will soon pay you money: if you imagine that the spider
spins down before your face, the omen is similar, for you will make a
good lot of money in some way. If a married woman dreams of seeing a
large spider, it foretells that she will have a miscarriage, which she
will not be sorry for. 72, 16.

SPY-GLASS. To dream of looking through one of these instruments and
observing objects at a distance, is a sign that you will enlarge your
possessions; if you are a farmer, you will add to your farm; if a man
of business, enlarge your business, &c.; but to a poor devil who hasn’t
got much of anything, it predicts that he will increase his family for
the want of something else to enlarge. 14.

SQUINTING. (_See Eye._) If a girl dreams of seeing a good-looking young
man who squints, it is a sign that some one has fallen in love with
her, and only waits an opportunity to demonstrate his passion: if a
gentleman dreams that his sweetheart squints, it foretells that she is
thinking about some one else rather than him, and would not break her
heart if he refused to  “come to tea.” 49.

SQUIRREL. To dream of these animals is a sign of good fortune; they
denote abundant crops to a farmer, and success to any one: if a man
dreams of being bitten by a squirrel, it foretells that he will lose
something by robbery; if he catches the animal when it bites him, and
puts it in a cage, the omen is different, for he will have a piece of
good luck—though a robbery may be mixed up in it. 21.

STABLE. To dream of a stable denotes hospitality and good
entertainment. 2, 11.

STAGE-COACH. To dream of riding in one signifies good luck in business:
if you run after one, you will be out of employment for a long season:
to see one pass, will rid you of troublesome friends. If you are in a
stage-coach and it turns over without injuring you, you will be lucky
in your speculations; if you dream you are killed by the fall, you must
expect misfortune. (_See Riding and Coach._) 6, 12, 72.

STAIN. For a girl to dream of stains on her dress, is a sign of
scandal: if she imagines that the stains are in front, she will be
accused of an improper intimacy with a gentleman; if on the right
sleeve, it will be insinuated that she took what did not belong to her;
if on the left sleeve, some one will be disparaging her veracity. If a
lover dreams that his sweetheart’s dress is stained behind, it shows
that she is untrue to him. 65, 13.

STARS. (_See Night._) To dream of seeing multitudes of bright stars
in a clear sky, is a sign (to a lady) that she will have a great many
children, and troops of good friends: to a man of business, such a
dream denotes as many customers as he sees stars in a clear sky. If a
girl dreams of seeing stars, and notices one or more to be brighter
than the rest, those bright ones are lovers, and the small ones are her
children or friends. 4, 19.

STATUE. To dream of marble statues is a sign of advancement; those who
imagine that they see beautiful statuary will be sure to rise above
their present position in society. 3, 13.

STEALING. (_See Thief._) If you dream of being robbed, it is a sign
that you will make a good speculation of some kind; to dream of
stealing any particular article yourself, foretells that you will soon
want just that thing; thus, if you imagine that you steal money, you
will be badly in want of some. 49, 16.

STEEL. (_See Metals._)

STEEPLE. (_See Tower._) To dream of going up to the top of a steeple,
and looking off at a distance, is a sign that you will increase your
property or effects: if a girl dreams this, it foretells that she will
marry above her present position. 6.

STICK. To hold a stick foretells mourning; to use it as a prop,
instability of fortune; to any one with it shows that you are
charitable; to receive a beating with one, predicts you will better
your position in life. 7, 7[TN: illegible].

STILLBORN. If a woman dreams that she gives birth to a stillborn child,
it foretells that her next child will be an uncommon bright one: a
childless woman who dreams this, will realize her fondest hopes. 49, 77.

STING. To dream of being stung by a bee or wasp, foretells an injury
by unjust and scandalous reports: a young lady who dreams that a bee
stings her, will probably have her chastity questioned. 64, 18.

STOCKINGS. To dream of cotton-stockings, foretells moderate happiness;
of silk, poverty. To take them off, denotes the reception of money.
Stockings with holes in them, signify the loss of property. 47, 71.

STORM. (_See Rain, Hail and Snow._) To dream of a devastating storm,
foretells losses and trouble: a violent rain-storm denotes that you
will have good luck, but that misfortunes will nevertheless injure your
prospects: gentle showers promise the luck without the adverse omen.
21, 72.

STOVE. To dream of a stove is a sign of wealth, if there be a fire in
it; but if cold, a sign of poverty. 8, 60.

STRANGER. For a girl to dream that she is kissed by a stranger,
promises her a new lover: a married woman who dreams this will probably
soon present her husband with a stranger in the shape of a new baby,
and he will unhappily doubt its paternity. 62, 8.

STRAW. To dream of a bundle of straw denotes abundance; if scattered
about, poverty. 4, 51, 78.

STRAWBERRIES. To dream of this fruit, denotes success in love affairs,
and a happy marriage. 39, 78.

SUCKLE. (_See Wet-Nurse._) If a married woman dreams of suckling a
child, it foretells that she will soon give birth to another; should
a bachelor dream of seeing a child suckled, he had better make up his
mind that he will soon have a young lady’s board to pay, whether he
marries or not; but as the latter would be the better course let him be
looking round for a wife at once. A married man who dreams this, will
soon become a happy father. 7, 9, 63.

SUGAR. To dream of sugar denotes purity: if a lover dreams that his
sweetheart presents him with white loaf-sugar, it shows that her
affection for him is pure and disinterested; it is therefore a good
sign for him to dream of taking tea with her, as she would naturally
put such sugar in his tea: to dream of sugar of any kind, or sugar
candy, is an excellent omen. 19, 48.

An old prediction runs as follows:

  Dreams of sugar and sweetmeat,
  Or drinking wine with pleasure great,
  And all dreams pleasant in condition,
  Show sports of love, and love’s fruition.

SUN. To dream that the sun blinds you, foretells that you will be
overwhelmed with good fortune: to see a beautiful bright sun, is a sign
of success in anything you may undertake: a red sun denotes mishaps
and accidents: if the sun looks dim and smoky, it foreshadows trouble
and difficulties. To dream of seeing the sun rise brings good news and
luck; the setting sun, misfortune. 2, 10, 20.

SWALLOWS. To dream of these birds, is a good omen, as it foretells
health and abundant crops to farmers: if you dream of killing a
swallow, it is a sign of a misfortune; if you catch the bird, you will
have splendid luck and get plenty of money; but if, after capturing,
you dream you let him go, a fortune will slip through your fingers. 25.

SWAN. To dream of a white swan, signifies riches; a black one, domestic
sorrow. Its song denotes death. 9, 18.

SWEARING. (_See Blasphemy._) To dream that you hear violent
altercations and profane swearing, is a sign that you will lose caste,
and go down in the world: if a man dreams that in his anger he curses
and swears, it foretells that he will come to poverty. 72, 4.

SWEEPING. For a girl to dream of sweeping the house, foretells that a
lover will soon make his appearance: if a married woman dreams this, it
shows that some outsider is charmed with her, and may venture to make
dishonorable proposals. 39, 12.

SWIMMING. To dream of swimming is an excellent omen, as it foretells
success and good fortune generally: if you dream you are swimming, or
bathing in clear water with ladies, it predicts that you will soon
marry the one of your choice, particularly if she be present; and to
dream you are naked and swimming in clear water, is a sign of excellent
luck in business matters. 54, 18.

SWORD. To dream of having a sword, is a sign of poverty: if you dream
of seeing a man flourish one of these weapons, it foretells you will
make a loss. A young girl who imagines her lover wears a sword, had
better give up all ideas of silks and satins, and learn how to cook and
wash, for she will be a poor man’s wife. 17.

TABLE-CLOTH. To dream of a dirty table-cloth foretells that you will
have plenty to eat. 51.

TAILOR. If a girl dreams that she has a tailor for her beau, and is
pleased with him, it is a sign that she will marry a softly sort of
a fellow, who will allow her to be both master and mistress after
marriage. Here is a popular rhyme in illustration: 19, 70.

  The maid who dreams a tailor she would wed,
    Will marry one who’ll be a log in bed;
  And she’ll be master, too, of all his riches,
    And, in the vulgar parlance,  “wear the breeches!”

TALL. If a young lady dreams that her beau is a very tall man, it is a
sign that her future husband will be a  “wee bit of a fellow,” and not
of much account. 4.

TAMARINDS. To dream of tamarinds shows much vexation and uneasiness
through a woman, bad success in trade, a rainy season, and news from
beyond sea that is disagreeable: in love they denote disappointment.
77, 16.

TANNERY. To dream of being in a tannery is a sign of health and riches:
if a girl dreams that her beau is a tanner, she will probably get a
good husband, and one who is well off, and will live to a good old age,
for your tanners are usually tough customers. 52, 7.

TAR. To dream of tar is a sign you will travel by water: if you dream
you get it on your hands or clothes, it shows that you will have
difficulties; and to imagine you accidentally seat yourself on tar, and
get stuck to the seat, foretells that you will be detained against your
will in some foreign country. 12, 6, 72.

TAVERN. (_See Inn._)

TEA. To dream of drinking tea, or being present at a tea-party, is a
sign of thrift and domestic happiness: a girl who dreams of meeting her
lover at such a party, or of drinking tea with him, may be sure that
he’s all right, and she can close her matrimonial bargain with him at
once without any risk. 61, 19.

TEARS. To dream of shedding tears of sympathy, is a sign that some one
is in love with you; this applies to both sexes, but more particularly
to girls who cry easy: if you imagine you cry from grief, some good
fortune awaits you, and you will have riches in proportion to the tears
shed: if you dream that you shed tears from vexation, it shows that you
will experience a loss just in proportion to the tears, or that some
one will injure your prospects by circulating a scandal. 14.

TEETH. To dream you lose your teeth, denotes the loss of friends,
troubles, and misfortunes; to the lover it shows the loss of your
sweetheart’s affections: to dream you cut a new tooth, denotes the
birth of a child who will make a figure in the world. 33, 11, 2.

TELEGRAPH. To dream of one denotes tidings from abroad, in a short
space of time, and still more speedily if you think the telegraph is at
work. 47, 10, 78.

TELESCOPE. (_See Spy-Glass._) To dream of looking through a telescope
at a distance over farm lands, is a sign you will either purchase a
farm or inherit one: if you dream of looking at the stars, it shows
that you will rise in the world—if at the moon, and you are delighted
with the view, it predicts for you great riches. 7, 14.

TEMPEST. (_See Storm._) To dream of long-continuing and great tempests,
signifies affliction, troubles, dangers, losses and perils; to the
poor, repose. 57, 8.

TEN-PINS. To dream of playing ten-pins, foretells disgrace; if the
centre pin falls, one of the players will die; if many pins fall, all
of the players will suffer loss. 10, 2, 20.

THAW. To dream of a thaw, and walking in splashy snow, foretells
trouble and losses: if a young fellow dreams that he walks through
splashy snow to go a courting, it is a sign that he will quarrel with
his sweetheart. 34, 18.

THEATRE. For a young man to dream of taking his sweetheart to the
theatre, is a sign that she will favor a new beau: if he dreams
of going to the theatre alone, and seeing his lady-love among the
audience, it shows that she has already seen and spoken to a gentleman
that she likes better than him: if a lady dreams this of her beau, the
omen is similar. 2, 4, 8.

THIEF. (_See Stealing._) To dream that thieves break into your house
and rob you, is a sign of honor or profit—the greater the robbery, the
more extensive will be your good fortune: if you dream that you catch a
thief and deliver him over to the officers of justice, it denotes that
you will have trouble in connection with your good fortune. 49, 16, 3.

THIRST. If any one dream of thirst or of drinking water, if the water
appear clear and acceptable, he will live joyfully and become wealthy;
if the water be troubled, warm, or offensive, it forewarns him that
without prudence, he will end his days in affliction. 20, 49.

THORN. For a girl to dream of accidentally sticking a thorn into her
finger is a sign she will have a ring presented to her, probably a
wedding ring: if a married woman dreams this, some outsider will make
love to her by first offering a ring. If any one dreams of sticking a
thorn in either foot or leg, it foretells improper intimacy with the
opposite sex which will not end in disgrace, but in marriage: married
people who dream this will do the same thing and not be found out. 39.

THROAT. For a married woman to dream that her throat is sore, or
swelled, or out of order, is a sign she is in the family way; and a
girl who dreams this had better be careful and keep pretty clear of the
young fellows, for fear of accidents. 60, 18.

THUMB. If a girl dreams that her beau hurts her by pinching her thumb,
it is a sign that if she marries him she will have to get her own
living, and help to support him besides: for a man to dream of losing
his thumb, or of an injury to it, foretells poverty—on the contrary, to
dream of a big thumb denotes much wealth. 36, 5.

THUNDER. To dream of heavy thunder denotes large crops to farmers: to
tradesmen, mechanics, or speculators, it foretells a big business, or
a successful speculation: if you are terrified by thunder, so much the
better. 51.

TIGER. To dream of seeing one of these animals in a rage, is a sign
that you have a treacherous friend who will endanger your reputation:
to see, in your dream, a sleeping or quiet tiger, foretells that you
will soon make the acquaintance of a treacherous or unworthy person. If
a girl dreams this, she had better be suspicious of the next young man
who offers her his attentions. 59, 62.

TOAD. To dream of seeing a toad is a sign of a rain storm: if, in your
dream, you see multitudes of small toads, it foretells good crops to
farmers, and excellent luck to anybody: if a newly married woman dreams
this, it shadows forth that she will have as many smart children as
she sees toads—three or four at a time, perhaps—and if she don’t, her
husband will beget them elsewhere. 3.

TOBACCO. For a boy to dream of chewing tobacco, is a sign of poverty,
as rum and tobacco-chewing go together: to dream of smoking foretells
waste, but is not exactly an omen of poverty, though waste always
precedes that state. The best way is not to dream of using tobacco at
all. If you dream of seeing large piles of tobacco, it is a sign of bad
luck and loss in some speculation. To dream you take snuff is a bad
omen in love affairs, but if you dream you sneeze when you take it, it
is a sign of long life. 49, 7, 55.

TOMATOES. To dream of this valuable vegetable, denotes prosperity in
life; if you have children, they will thrive; if you are in love, your
suit will be successful. If a maiden dreams of them, it denotes that
she will marry her present sweetheart, have many children, and be very
happy; to a farmer it denotes abundant crops. 78, 6.

TOMB. To dream of visiting a large and magnificent tomb-stone
foreshadows that you will fall in love with some one above you in
social position: visiting a cemetery or grave-yard in your dream, is a
sign that your turn will soon come to join the matrimonial ranks. 48.

TONGUE. If a lady dreams of having a sore on her tongue, it is a sign
that she has uttered a slander. 54.

TOOTH-ACHE. To dream that you have the tooth-ache is a sign of trouble:
if you imagine that you are about to have the tooth pulled, it
foretells that your trouble will end by a piece of good luck; and if
you dream that the tooth is out, and you have it in your hand, you will
soon gain a good lump of money. 8, 5, 34.

TORCH. To see a bright torch-light at a distance in a dark night, and
go toward it, foretells a successful journey; but if you stumble by the
way you will experience an accident: to dream of carrying a lighted
torch at night, is a sign that some distant friend will pay you a
visit. 20.

TOWER. (_See Steeple._) To dream of going upon a high tower, and
looking off on a beautiful landscape, foretells that you will acquire
land either by purchase or inheritance: if you look off upon the water,
it is a sign of a journey by sea, during which you will acquire riches:
if birds are flying around the tower, they foretell so many troubles.
58.

TRAP. To dream of setting a trap to catch rats or mice, is a sign, to a
girl, that she will receive the attentions of a dishonest lover: if she
dreams of catching any, she will probably marry a great scamp, or be
seduced by one. 6.

TRAVELING. To dream of traveling by railroad or steamboat is a very
good omen, as it denotes thrift and success in your business; but if
you dream you are journeying in your own private coach, it foreshadows
poverty in the end, though you may have temporary good luck: if you
dream you have crossed the ocean, and find yourself in a foreign
country, you may be sure that good fortune will attend all your
business transactions. 6, 11, 66.

TREES. (_See Blossom._) To dream of green and flourishing trees is an
excellent omen, as it foretells riches—the larger the trees, the better
the fortune: if you dream of climbing into a high tree, you will not
only be rich, but will come to great distinction. If a girl should
dream of seeing her lover up a tree, she will marry a wealthy and
distinguished man. 4.

TRIPE. If a woman dreams of cleaning tripe, it foretells that she will
either be untrue to her husband or an outrage will be perpetrated upon
her: to dream of eating tripe is about as bad, for it shows to a man
that he will be engaged in some affair with a female (not his wife)
which will bring him to disgrace. 28, 9.

TRIPLETS. If a woman dreams that she gives birth to three children at
one parturition, it foretells riches and honors: if a husband dreams
that his wife is so delivered, the omen is the same: if any one dreams
of seeing triplets who are healthy and well-formed, it foretells good
luck and success, particularly in love matters. 46, 5.

TROUT. To dream of catching trout is an excellent omen, as it foretells
that you will get money—the larger the trout, the more cash you will
receive. It is stated in some of the books that to newly married people
such a dream foretells the birth of a child, but I have been unable
to verify this, because most young married people will have children
whether they dream of trout or not. 29, 5.

TRUMPET. To dream you hear the sound of a trumpet, is a bad omen, and
denotes trouble and misfortune; to the tradesman it presages the loss
of business; to the farmer, bad crops; to the lover, insincerity in the
object of your affections. 46, 9.

TRUNK. To dream of a full trunk, shows the necessity of economy; an
empty one, signifies that you may expect to receive money. 39, 62, 1.

TUB. To dream of a tub is a bad omen: if it be filled with water, you
have evil to fear; an empty tub signifies trouble; and to run against
one, sorrow. 46, 9.

TULIPS. To dream of these beautiful flowers is a sign of abundance: if
you imagine you see a garden full of them belonging to yourself, it
foretells that you will become rich and distinguished: if a girl dreams
that her lover presents her with tulips, she will undoubtedly marry
well, and probably her husband will be wealthy. 48.

TURKEY. To dream of seeing a flock of turkeys denotes to a tradesman,
or a farmer, that he will have a transaction which will bring him in a
considerable sum in ready money: if a lover who is about to be married
dreams of turkeys, he will find that his sweetheart has got a marriage
portion in ready money. 72, 15.

TURNIP. To dream of turnips signifies the discovery of secrets and
domestic quarrels. 29, 52.

TURTLE. To dream of turtles is a sign of long life: an engaged young
lady who dreams of these animals will probably marry according to her
wishes, and live with her husband until they become an old couple; but
her husband will be one of the slow and easy kind. 67, 49, 5.

TWINS. To dream of having twins, brings good news, and is a sign of
honor or riches; it is also a good omen in love matters if a man dreams
it, but if a girl has this dream she must look out for the boys. 44, 4.

UMBRELLA. If a young girl dreams that she has got a new umbrella, it
foretells a new lover: if a married woman dreams this, it is a sign
that some other gentleman besides her husband is enamored of her. A
man who dreams of buying an umbrella will have a narrow escape from
threatened danger. 70, 30, 1.

UNDER GROUND. To dream that you go down under ground, whether into a
well, a deep cellar or vault, or a cave, denotes your early death; but
if you dream that you are digging in the ground, and are in a hole
which you have dug, the omen is different, for it denotes riches and
long life. 5, 9, 45.

UNDRESS. To see your wife undress, signifies wantonness; to undress in
the presence of others, slander; to undress in your room alone, the
discovery of secrets. 48, 3.

VACCINATED. To dream of being vaccinated foretells good health; and if
you imagine that you have a large sore on your arm from vaccination, it
is a sign that you will present to some one a liberal gift, and receive
much honor. 49.

VARNISHING. To dream that your house or furniture is being, or has
been, newly varnished, is a sign of a funeral; but if you imagine that
you are varnishing anything, it merely foretells a loss with out a
death. 59, 76.

VAULT. An unexpected estate will fall to you, if you dream of a vault.
21, 18.

VEAL. To dream of veal being roasted is good; but boiled, shows
sickness; and raw, a great disappointment; particularly to those who
have recently formed an attachment or any new connection. 48, 2.

VELVET. If a lady dreams of new velvet dresses, it foretells poverty:
velvet cushions, slippers or bonnets, are signs of waste and want. 36,
18.

VENISON. To dream of eating venison is a sign that you will travel: if
you imagine you see large saddles of venison in market, it foretells a
journey for business purposes which will be profitable. 42, 70.

VERMIN. To dream of any kind of vermin, is ominous of ill-luck and
enemies, especially if they are in the house, or near the fireplace;
but if out of the house, they are unimportant. 27, 62.

VEXATION. To dream of being much vexed, foretells the reverse, and that
you will shortly be much pleased. 33, 61.

VINEGAR. To dream you drink vinegar, signifies sickness and sharp
words: to use it in pickling, is a sign of gain. 29, 6, 76.

VINES. To dream of seeing or pruning grape-vines, or gathering grapes,
is prosperity to persons in trade, journeys to the rich, employment to
the poor, and comfort to those in affliction. 38, 17.

VIOLIN. (_See Fiddle._)

VIRGIN. If a man dreams that he defloured a virgin, it is a sign that
he will be disgraced by some act of his own: to dream of seeing the
Virgin Mary, foretells that great honors await you: such a dream, to an
honest business man, promises him riches and honor; but to a dishonest
one, it foretells disaster. 54, 3.

VOMITING. To dream of vomiting is usually a sign of health: if you
imagine that you vomit up worms, it foretells that you will have good
luck in preventing a loss, or a robbery. 14, 65.

VOTE. To dream you are voting, is bad, particularly to a sick person:
for a newly married woman to dream of voting, is a sure sign that her
first child will be a boy, who will come to great honors. 9.

VOW. To dream that you have made a vow and broken it, is bad to all.
21, 78.

VULTURE. To dream of the vulture is unfortunate to all, except sick
persons, to whom it foretells a speedy recovery. 41, 62.

WADING. If a girl dreams of wading in clear water, it is a sign that
she will soon marry, and be delighted with her husband’s embraces: if
she imagines that the water is rily or muddy, it foretells that she
will enjoy the pleasures of illicit love. If a man dreams of wading,
it denotes that he will be engaged in some intrigue with a female—the
deeper the water, the more difficult the realization of his wishes:
muddy water denotes loose women. 20, 16.

WAKE. To dream of going to a wake where drinking and howling is
going on, is a sign of poverty and misery: if a girl dreams this, it
foretells her speedy marriage with a man who will turn out to be a
miserable drunkard. If a young man dreams of seeing his sweetheart at a
wake, he had better back out from the bargain, as she will never be of
much account, and may become a drunkard. 8.

WALKING. To dream you are walking in a dirty and muddy place,
foretells sickness and vexation: in love, it denotes bad temper and
disappointment. 47.

WALLS. To dream you are walking on, or climbing over walls, denotes
some dangerous enterprise, trouble, and vexation: if you get down
without the wall falling, or hurting yourself, you will succeed; if
not, be disappointed. 71, 4.

WALNUTS. To dream of them denotes riches and happiness; to the lover,
success and a good tempered sweetheart. 37, 16.

WAR. To dream that war exists, and that you see bodies of troops
marching, foretells quarrels and troubles in your family, if you have
one, and if not, among your relatives: if you imagine you see a battle,
the omen is still worse, as the quarrel will probably become public and
notorious. 4, 6, 24.

WARMING-PAN. If any single person dreams that his or her bed is warmed
with one of these utensils, it is a positive forerunner of their
marriage: if a married woman dreams this, it is a sign that she will go
to bed with a strange bedfellow (whether male or female, is not known).
16.

WARTS. To dream of warts on your left hand is a sign you will receive
some money; if they are on the right hand, it foretells that you will
pay away money: to dream of a wart on the nose, signifies that you will
be distinguished; on the neck or bosom of a female, denotes riches. 65.

WASHING. To dream of washing, foretells change of abode, and if you
wash in clear, cold water, the dream is an omen of good; but If the
water is dirty or turbid, it is the reverse. If a woman dream she
is washing clothes, it is a sign she will hear good news within
twenty-four hours. 20, 16.

WASP. (_See Sting._) To dream of wasps denotes thrift and abundance,
particularly to farmers and those who have fruit-trees. If a girl
dreams that she is stung by a mud-wasp, it foretells that she will
marry a gentleman who will love her dearly. 62, 18.

WASTE. To dream of waste is a sign of beggary, provided you are the
cause of the waste; but if you feel bad and try to prevent it, the omen
is one of losses, which may not end in beggary. 29, 17.

WATCH. (_See Clock._) If you dream of buying a gold watch, it is a
sign of poverty; but if you imagine that you are presented with one,
it foretells good luck and money-getting: to dream of losing your gold
watch is also a good omen, as it denotes success in business. 42, 11.

WATCHMAN. To dream of calling in one, gives confidence: to see a
person taken to prison by a watchman, shows that you must be careful
in conducting your business. If the watchman take hold of you, it is a
very good sign. To see many watchmen together, signifies the loss of
money. 67, 52.

WATER. To dream of being on the water, is good, if the water be clear;
but if muddy or troubled, the reverse. To see a wide expanse of water,
over or on which you wish to get, but cannot, shows that you are
about to embark in some undertaking without first securing the means
of success. (_See Bathing, Fountain, Pump, Pitcher, River, Rowing,
Sailing, Swimming, Thirst, Washing and Well._) 42, 18.

WATERMELONS. (_See Melons._)

WEDDING. (_See Marriage._) To dream of being at a jolly wedding, is a
sign of a funeral: if you imagine that you kiss the bride, it foretells
the death of a dear friend or relative. In an old dream-book, published
1808, it is stated that to dream of kissing the bride, is a sign of
your own death, but on referring to the best authorities, I find it is
necessary to dream that the bride should herself be the kissing party,
and that an impressive kiss from her on the occasion denotes the death
of the person kissed. 42, 78, 2.

WELL. To dream of looking into a deep well, is a sign you will find a
treasure: if you dream of falling into a deep well, it foretells your
death: if you imagine you draw clear water from a well, and drink it,
you will surely have good fortune of some kind. 7, 14, 77.

WET-NURSE. To dream of seeing a wet-nurse suckling a child, is a
sign of venery: to a married man it foretells that he will break his
marriage vows; and to unmarried girls it denotes shame. 7, 9, 63.

WHALE. To dream of seeing one of these monsters alive in the ocean, is
a sign that you will be in great peril of losing either your life or
property: if you dream that you spear or harpoon a whale successfully,
it foretells great and abundant fortune. 37, 22, 61.

WHEAT. (_See Grain._)

WHISKERS. If a man dreams that he has very long whiskers or beard, it
foretells that he will commit some folly in connection with a female;
to a married man it shows that he will appear ridiculous from neglect
of his wife and attentions to other women who flatter him; to a single
man, that he will lose caste by foolish, though perhaps not criminal
conduct toward silly girls. 78.

WHIST. (_See Cards._)

WHITEWASH. To dream of having your house or place of business
whitewashed, is an excellent omen, as it promises you good health,
and a good name and repute among your friends: if a woman dreams of
whitewashing her house, or any part of it, it foretells that she will
have a son who will be distinguished, or that some act of hers will
attract public attention. 42, 77.

WHORE. If a man dreams of associating with one of this class of women,
it foretells losses and disgrace: should a girl dream of playing the
whore, when in fact she is chaste, it foretells her speedy marriage,
and that she will love her husband. 19.

WHORTLEBERRIES. For a girl to dream of picking these berries in
abundance, is a sign she will marry very young and get a good husband,
though not a rich one: to dream of eating whortleberries, denotes
health. 69, 30.

WIDOW. If a girl dreams that she is a widow, it foretells that she will
have many lovers: such a dream to a married woman, denotes that some
man beside her husband is in love with her. 38, 60.

WIG. To dream of wearing a wig is a good omen to a bald bachelor, as
it foretells that some lady has a design to catch the poor fellow, and
will not scruple as to the means she uses to accomplish it: if a young
man dreams of wearing a wig, it is a sign that he will sleep with his
sweetheart before he marries her. 3, 6, 69.

WILL. To dream of making your will is a sign of long life, and good
fortune generally: if you imagine that you make your will to give a
legacy to a lady, it foretells to a man (whether married or single)
that he will marry. 22.

WILLOW. To dream of weeping willows is a sign of sickness and death: if
they hang over a stream, it foretells sickness only. 12, 70.

WINE. To dream of drinking wine is a sign of poverty: if a lover dreams
that his sweetheart treats him to a glass of wine, it foretells that
she will be an unthrifty wife. 39.

WITCH. To dream of a witch foretells that you will leave your home
and sojourn among strangers: if the witch attempts to injure you, it
denotes that you will be dependent upon strangers for your support. No
intelligent person believes in witches, yet a great many dream of them,
and the above is the horoscope of such a dream. 17.

WOLF. To dream of being chased by one of these animals, foretells that
you will be cheated in a trade or bargain: if a girl dreams of being
frightened by a wolf, it shows that her lover (if she has one) is a
bad man, and she had better discard him; if she has no lover, some
black-hearted fellow will try to make her acquaintance. 45.

WOODCHUCK. To dream of catching one of these animals, is a sign that
you will be robbed, and that the thief will be detected: if you imagine
you kill the woodchuck, you will probably recover your stolen property.
36, 19.

WOODS. (_See Grove and Picnic._)

WORK. (_See Harvest._) To dream that you were working hard, and are
very tired, is a sign of sickness: if you imagine that you see men at
work, it foretells a successful business. 77.

WORMS. (_See Grub._) To dream of fish-worms, such as are dug in
the garden, is a sign of health and good fortune; dreaming of any
destructive worms foretells sickness and losses: if you dream that
worms spin down from a tree and light upon you, it denotes difficulties
and bad luck. 65, 4, 70.

WOUND. To dream that you are wounded by being stabbed or shot by an
enemy, foretells losses and poverty; if the wounds are accidental, it
still denotes losses, though your general fortune may not be affected.
13, 42.

WREN. To dream that one of these musical little birds makes her nest
anywhere on your premises, is a sign of joy and riches; a girl who
dreams this will make a happy match, though perhaps not a rich one, as
the riches only come to the family that lives in the house. 1, 73.

WRINKLES. If a lady dreams that her face has become wrinkled, it is a
sign that some one is, or has been, praising her good looks; an old
bachelor who dreams this,  “had better believe” that some young lady is
in love with him, for there is no accounting for taste. 66, 4.

WRIST. If a girl dreams that her wrist is large or mis-shapen, it
foretells that she will come to poverty after marriage; if she imagines
that there is a tumor or swelling, or even a wart on it, it is a sign
that she will be dependent on some one for her bread, and that person
may or may not be her husband. 7, 57, 19.

WRITING. (_See Pen and Accounts._) To dream of writing a letter,
foretells that absent friends are about to visit you: if a girl dreams
of writing a love-letter, it is a sign that her lover will soon return
and clasp her in his arms, if she allows any such familiarities. To
dream you make a blot while writing, is a sign of sickness. 14.

YACHT. To dream you see a yacht under full sail, while you are on
shore, is a sign you will soon fall in love with a pretty maid, or
widow. To dream you are sailing in a yacht with a pleasant breeze, is a
good omen, and denotes success in business, and to lovers, happiness.
Dreams of sailing on smooth water are good to all persons, but to dream
the weather is stormy, predicts quarrels and strife. (_See Ship and
Boat._) 71, 29.

YELLOW. To dream of having any yellow article presented to you, is
a sign you will get gold: if a girl dreams that her lover gives her
yellow flowers, it foretells that she will marry rich. 60, 41.

YOKE. To dream of seeing sleek and healthy cattle yoked together and
acting in harmony, is a sign of a happy marriage: if a girl dreams
this, she will be apt to put her own neck in Hymen’s yoke before a
great while. To imagine you see yoked cattle wrangling, and trying to
get their necks out of the yoke, foretells matrimonial troubles, though
it still denotes wedlock to the unmarried. 6, 11.

YOUNG. If an old or middle aged person dreams that they are young, it
foretells their death: for a young person to dream that he or she is a
child, the omen is similar; but to dream _of youths_, is a sign that
you will live to a great age. 69, 4.

ZEBRA. To dream of seeing a zebra, is a sign of a quarrel: if you
imagine that somebody presented you with one of these animals, or that
you have purchased it, it foretells, to a young man, that he will marry
a rich but quarrelsome wife, and that she will be constantly annoying
him by bragging of her property. 39, 70, 32.

ZOUAVE. (_See Parade._) To dream you see Zouaves, as well as other
soldiers and armed men, denotes, that you will have quarrels and
trouble in your family, if you have one, and if you have not, among
your relatives: to the single man, this dream foreshadows that his
sweetheart loves another better than himself; and to the maiden it
signifies her lover will try and seduce her. 58, 1, 77.

ZINK. (_See Metals._)


  LIST OF DREAMS, WITHOUT INTERPRETATIONS, BUT WITH THE NUMBERS THEY
                               SIGNIFY.

  Afternoon, 46.
  Alabaster, 13, 78, 3.
  Album, 63, 18.
  Alley, 2, 55.
  Alloy, 9.
  Alum, 62, 12.
  Anchovy, 73, 1, 62.
  Andiron, 33.
  Apprentice, 54.
  Apron, 8.
  Arch, 4, 37, 9.
  Archbishop, 13, 6.
  Architect, 72, 3.
  Armory, 54.
  Army, 44.
  Arrow, 37, 20.
  Arrow-root, 49, 7, 8.
  Ascent, 4.
  Asparagus, 16, 40, 1.
  Assistance, 71, 33.
  Attack, 69.
  Axe, 49, 74.

  Band-box, 21, 44.
  Bantem Fowl, 34.
  Bark of Dogs, 64, 18.
  Bark of Trees, 77.
  Barley, 3, 19, 10.
  Bar-room, 14.
  Basket, 46, 31, 2.
  Basque, 17.
  Bass-viol, 37, 54.
  Bass-voice, 53, 72, 14.
  Bathroom, 11, 76, 1.
  Batter, 4, 18.
  Bedfellow, 72.
  Bedstead, 15.
  Bee-hive, 22, 1.
  Beef, 27, 71, 8.
  Beef, boiled, 8, 4, 32.
  Beef, corned, 64, 8.
  Beef, roasted, 16, 64.
  Bell-ringer, 51.
  Belly-ache, 78, 2.
  Belly-band, 13.
  Bier, 47, 6.
  Billiards, 9, 6, 54.
  Billiard Table, 6, 9, 72.
  Birthday, _Play your age_.
  Bishop, 63.
  Blackbird, 41, 3.
  Black-eye, 57.
  Blacksmith, 35, 61, 2.
  Blanket, 7, 53.
  Blarny, 18.
  Blind Man or Woman, 78.
  Blind Man’s Buff, 31.
  Blue-stocking, 28, 10.
  Blushing, 71, 49, 8.
  Boarding-house, 65, 5.
  Boasting, 4.
  Boatswain, 12.
  Bomb-shell, 39, 58.
  Bones, 3, 9, 70.
  Book-binder, 28.
  Book-store, 65, 2, 11.
  Borrowing, 45, 3.
  Bosom, 53.
  Bottle, 10, 19.
  Box, 68, 13.
  Box in a Theatre, 12, 4, 48.
  Box-tree, 71, 6.
  Box-wood, 8.
  Boxing, 61.
  Boxing-gloves, 16, 59, 10.
  Bracelets, 78.
  Brains, 37, 18, 4.
  Breeches, 18, 41.
  Bride, 61.
  Bridegroom, 6.
  Bridesmaid, 32.
  Brimstone, 35, 17.
  Broom, 8, 1.
  Buffalo, 59.
  Builder, 66, 3, 47.
  Building, 77, 41.
  Burglar, 7, 70.
  Burr, 36, 5, 48.
  Burying-ground, 69.
  Button of Bone, 35, 14.
  Button of Gold, 19, 1.
  Button of Silver, 58.

  Calendar, 40.
  Calves, 68.
  Camp, 78, 20, 54.
  Camp-meeting, 21, 5.
  Candle-stick, 2.
  Capers, 46.
  Capmaker, 64, 19.
  Capon, 39, 14, 72.
  Captain, 63, 27.
  Card de visite, 1, 20.
  Cardmaker, 36, 2.
  Carnival, 51, 62.
  Carpenter, 48.
  Cartridge, 37, 1.
  Cash-box, 19, 7.
  Cashier, 63.
  Castor-oil, 21.
  Cavalry, 76.
  Celestial Signs, 57, 10.
  Chairmaker, 3, 15.
  Chairman, 18.
  Chalice, 70.
  Chalk, 19.
  Chamber, 37.
  Champagne, 72, 60.
  Champion, (of any thing,) 62.
  Chandelier, 6.
  Changing Money, 53, 1.
  Chapel, 18.
  Charcoal, 10.
  Charm, 57.
  Checkers, 16.
  Childbed, 72, 12.
  Chin, 44.
  Choir, 2, 7, 14.
  Church Meeting, 55, 1.
  Cider, 31.
  Circle, 8.
  Cistern, 61, 30.
  Clergyman, 29, 6.
  Clerk, 5.
  Cloak, 69, 70.
  Cloister, 54, 9, 11.
  Cloth, 34.
  Cloves, 65.
  Coat, 40.
  Cobbler, 16.
  Cock-fight, 21, 33.
  Coffee, 70.
  Coffee-house, 1, 17, 6.
  Coffee-mill, 71, 30.
  Cold, 71.
  College, 16, 3.
  Colonel, 64.
  Color, 43, 16, 1.
  Comb, 21.
  Comb-maker, 47, 3.
  Combing the Hair, 50.
  Commander, 34.
  Commandments, 41.
  Commerce, 73.
  Commodore, 16, 4.
  Companion, 37.
  Confectioner, 64, 22.
  Confessions, 67.
  Confidence, 58.
  Conflagration, 2, 71.
  Confusion, 30.
  Conjurer, 48.
  Conscience, 46, 19.
  Conspiracy, 4.
  Consume, 31.
  Consumption, 75.
  Convent, 32, 60.
  Convention, 1, 73.
  Cooking, 68.
  Cooking Stove, 5[TN: illegible]
  Cooper, 10, 27.
  Copperas, 15.
  Copperplate, 48.
  Coppersmith, 78, 3.
  Copying, 2.
  Coral, Red, 41.
  Coral, White, 49.
  Coronation, 16, 5.
  Cot, 17, 76.
  Cotton, 70.
  Cotton-gin, 63, 1.
  Cough, 31.
  Counter, 26.
  Counterfeit Money, 18.
  Courage, 74.
  Court, 47, 50.
  Courting, 30.
  Cousin, 5.
  Cover, 74.
  Coverlid, 1, 11.
  Creek, 47, 5.
  Crinoline, 68.
  Crop, 4.
  Cruelty, 37.
  Crystal, 45.
  Cunning, 18, 71.
  Cup, 34.
  Cup of Coffee, 14.
  Cup of Tea, 43, 8.
  Cup of Water, 50.
  Curtains, 58.
  Custom House, 19.
  Cut, 1, 8.
  Cutler, 40.

  Dahlgren Gun, 52.
  Dairy Maid, 70.
  Dancing Master, 69, 2.
  Dandelion, 46, 18.
  Delay, 64, 1.
  Desert, 16, 5, 2.
  Desk, 78.
  Devil, 7.
  Diarrhœa. 33, 52.
  Distrust, 19, 8.
  Divorce, 41, 70, 4.
  Dominoes, 32.
  Dower, 41, 6, 77.
  Dragon, 13, 50.
  Dressing, 43.
  Drill, 5, 78, 60.
  Driver, 1, 63.
  Dromedary, 3.
  Drug Store, 9, 16, 29.
  Drummer, 11, 26.
  Dryness, 31.
  Ducats, 70.
  Dung-fork, 25, 62.
  Dunghill, 77.

  Ear-rings, 39, 43.
  Ebony, 44.
  Elbow, 52.
  Election, 2, 78.
  Embalming, 15, 5, 39.
  Emperor, 9.
  Empire, 26, 39.
  Engineer, 20, 62.
  Ensign, 7, 28.
  Entanglement, 77.
  Entrance, 39, 2, 44.
  Envy, 17.
  Epaulettes, 60, 65.
  Errands, 19, 38.
  Exchange Office, 52, 45, 69.
  Exile, 26.
  Expulsion, 7, 13.
  Ecstasy, 74, 47, 56.

  Falsehood, 8, 11, 29.
  Farrier, 2.
  Fashion, 72, 1, 23.
  Fast Horse, 23, 40, 2.
  Father-in-law, 55.
  Fencing Master, 47.
  Fencing School, 77, 38.
  Fig Tree, 36.
  File, 5, 56.
  Finding anything, 10, 32, 60.
  Firebrand, 57, 1.
  Fire Buckets, 39, 26.
  Fire Engine, 20, 3.
  Firepan, 6, 47, 52.
  Fireplace, 12.
  Fire-tongs, 28, 13.
  Firework, 16, 32.
  Fish-bone, 29, 37, 21.
  Fisherman, 16.
  Fish-hook, 63, 9.
  Fish-market, 53, 3, 67.
  Fish-net, 47.
  Fish-pond, 18.
  Flame, 38.
  Flannel, 25, 64.
  Flattery, 46, 5, 13.
  Flax, 66.
  Flax-dresser, 17, 46.
  Flax-spinning, 9, 27, 69.
  Foal, 4, 12.
  Foreigner, 73.
  Foreman, 8.
  Foot, 29, 42, 3.
  Fort, 11.
  Founder, 47, 58, 7.
  Fox, 22.
  Friend, 21.
  Fruit-seller, 70, 15.
  Fruit Trees, 29, 57.
  Furnace, 13, 39, 6.
  Furniture, 45.

  Gallery, 56, 61, 7.
  Gardener, 16, 47.
  Garland, 62, 4.
  Garment, 39, 47, 8.
  Garret, 4, 10, 74.
  Garrison, 1, 42, 59.
  Genealogical Tree, 27.
  Gilder, 23, 15, 63.
  Gilliflower, 53, 6, 9.
  Gingerbread, 44.
  Girl, 12, 19, 27.
  Glass-house, 67, 73.
  Glazier, 10.
  Gnat, 25, 64.
  Goldbeater, 37, 52.
  Gold-leaves, 19.
  Gooseberries, 54.
  Grandfather, 77, 53, 39.
  Grandmother, 68.
  Gratitude, 44, 26, 21.
  Greek, 5.
  Grocery, 39, 27, 6.
  Guardian, 21.
  Guests, 13, 55.
  Gymnast, 61, 28.

  Hair brush, 7.
  Handkerchief, 30, 65, 10.
  Harness, 15.
  Hatmaker, 59, 77.
  Hayloft, 43, 25, 6.
  Hay-wagon, 16.
  Hazelnut, 2.
  Head, 47, 69, 9.
  Headache, 29.
  Hedgehog, 15.
  Helping anyone, 6, 73.
  Hemp, 19.
  Hempseed, 64, 39.
  Henroost, 23, 77, 9.
  Herbs, 27.
  Herdsman, 44, 29.
  Hermit, 4, 9, 16.
  Herring, 1, 27.
  High School, 15.
  High Tide, 68.
  Hill, 45, 22.
  Hip, 73, 5.
  History, 49, 58.
  Holyday, 22, 39.
  Home, 10.
  Homicide, 4, 37, 69.
  Hoof, 56, 18, 22.
  Horseshoe, 6.
  Horse-cart, 59.
  Hotel-keeper, 17, 34.
  Housekeeper, 49.
  Humpback, 77, 9.
  Hunter, 69.
  Husband, 31.
  Hyacinth, 36, 7, 19.
  Hypocrite, 55, 66.

  Imitation, 42.
  Impatience, 29, 31.
  Inauguration, 17, 3.
  Indian Corn, 10.
  Ingratitude, 33, 29.
  Inheritance, 9, 15.
  Inkstand, 75, 69.
  Inquisition, 57, 29.
  Inscription, 6, 39, 73.
  Interpreter, 46, 22.
  Intestines, 49, 52.
  Introduction, 22.
  Invalid, 9, 4.
  Invitation, 30, 77, 5.
  Ironing, 29, 42.

  Jailer, 18.
  Jasmine, 2, 38.
  Jeweller, 69.
  Jewess, 17, 23.
  Jewsharp, 70.
  Journeyman, 21, 68, 6.
  Judge, 9.
  Juniper, 44.
  Justice, 39, 47.

  Kettle, 28, 51.
  Kitchen, 69, 7, 74.
  Kitchen-ware, 27, 39, 1.
  Knifegrinder, 6, 47.
  Knitting, 18, 33.

  Lace String, 2.
  Ladies’ Maid, 35, 20.
  Lame Person, 15.
  Lance, 13, 19.
  Lap, 26, 29.
  Lapidary, 77.
  Leak, 22, 49.
  Leather, 15, 52.
  Legislature, 42.
  Lemonade, 6, 10.
  Loadstone, 55.
  Locks, 73, 4.
  Locksmith, 2.
  Locusts, 19, 61.
  Lodging, 29, 21, 9.
  Lodging-house, 41, 7, 56.
  Lottery Ticket, 2, 12.

  Maccaroni, 26.
  Machine, 1, 9.
  Magazine, 16, 18.
  Magistrate, 49.
  Mahogany, 29, 26.
  Major, 5, 9.
  Major General, 14, 45.
  Mariner, 3.
  Mark, 16.
  Mason, 9, 19, 45.
  Mast, 6, 39.
  Master, 24, 64.
  Matting, 10.
  Mattress, 3, 7, 26.
  Mattress-maker, 29.
  Meal, 11, 19.
  Measure, 52, 63.
  Melancholy, 19.
  Memorial, 6, 14.
  Merchants, 73.
  Mermaid, 41, 65.
  Messenger, 13.
  Miller, 25, 47.
  Mine, 56.
  Minerals, 39, 1.
  Mineral Water, 67, 9, 77.
  Mixture, 71, 6.
  Model, 10.
  Mole, 26, 39.
  Morning, 6.
  Morocco, 30, 71.
  Mortar, 45.
  Moss, 19, 49.
  Mother-in-law, 45.
  Mouse-trap, 4, 16, 64.
  Murder, 53, 32, 29.
  Murderer, 17.
  Musician, 44, 56.
  Musk, 21.
  Musket, 5, 45.
  Muskrat, 59.
  Myrrh, 73, 9.

  Necromancer, 14.
  Neighbor, 78.
  Nest, 29, 45.
  New Moon, 38.
  New Year, 18, 46.
  Noon, 56, 8.
  Notary, 49.
  Nutmeg, 29.

  Oil Can, 46.
  Oil Dealer, 19, 43.
  Olives, 33.
  One-eyed, 7.
  Orator, 29, 44.
  Organist, 37, 6, 3.
  Ornament, 52.
  Ostrich, 44, 11.
  Overcoat, 15.

  Package, 13, 29.
  Pail, 22.
  Pain, 7.
  Painter, 21, 49.
  Paper Mill, 41.
  Parchment, 19, 28, 14.
  Pardon, 6.
  Parents, 29, 49.
  Parson, 67.
  Partridge, 46, 77.
  Passion, 26.
  Pastry, 4, 9.
  Pasteboard, 18.
  Patient, 49, 1.
  Patriot, 5, 76.
  Patrol, 26, 13, 44.
  Pawn Ticket, 2, 9.
  Pencil, 3.
  Pen-holder, 71, 19.
  Persecution, 56.
  Perspiration, 78.
  Pestle, 48, 6.
  Petticoat, 22, 47, 1.
  Pheasant, 1.
  Philosopher, 34, 71.
  Physician, 19, 33, 2.
  Piazza, 6, 73.
  Pickpockets, 66.
  Pillory, 10, 55.
  Pine Tree, 17.
  Pine Wood, 29, 59.
  Plane, 18.
  Planet, 39, 4, 70.
  Planting, 27, 74.
  Plate, 9.
  Pleasure, 25, 57.
  Pocket, 20, 41.
  Pocket Knife, 6.
  Pomatum, 19.
  Pool, 27, 56.
  Poorhouse, 39.
  Poor People, 57, 78.
  Poplar Tree, 5.
  Porcelain, 27, 34.
  Porcupine, 49.
  Postage, 5, 28.
  Pot, 16, 63.
  Potatoes, 72, 10, 1.
  Potter, 57.
  Poultry, 52.
  Poultry-seller, 49, 32.
  Powder, 29.
  Preacher, 19, 41.
  Prelate, 28, 59, 3.
  Presumption, 71, 4.
  Prince, 69.
  Princess, 19, 44.
  Print, 13.
  Printer, 29, 50.
  Printing Office, 69.
  Printing Press, 47, 7.
  Printseller, 21.
  Privacy, 52, 77.
  Prize-fighter, 9, 17, 49.
  Professor, 15.
  Prophet, 3, 38.
  Prudence, 10.
  Purchaser, 49, 75, 6.

  Quack Doctor, 44, 2.
  Quack Medicine, 19, 38.
  Quadrupeds, 27.

  Raisins, 21, 45.
  Rake, 39.
  Raw Meat, 46, 77.
  Receipts, 44.
  Reconciliation, 7.
  Reed, 29, 64, 2.
  Register, 37, 19.
  Republic, 59, 1.
  Resurrection, 4.
  Review, 37, 57.
  Riding School, 10, 44.
  Rifle, 21.
  Ringing Bells, 59.
  Riot, 30.
  Rogue, 29, 48.
  Romance, 51, 13, 8.
  Rope, 19, 62.
  Rope-maker, 73.
  Rose-bud, 1.
  Rose Bush, 43, 47.
  Rosin, 9.
  Rupture, 20.

  Saddle, 2, 7.
  Saddler, 37.
  Sailmaker, 71, 3, 20.
  Salt, 68.
  Saltpetre, 15, 61.
  Salve, 7.
  Sampler, 13, 46.
  Sawdust, 66.
  Saw, 1, 63, 9.
  Sawyer, 30.
  Scabbard, 32, 49.
  Scandal, 57.
  School Teacher, 10, 78.
  Scorpion, 29.
  Scoundrel, 40, 42.
  Scrap Book, 39, 44.
  Scratch the head, 55, 73, 22.
  Scull, 29.
  Sculptor, 3, 39.
  Scum, 17.
  Seal, 24.
  Seaman, 42, 55, 31.
  Seamstress, 49, 60.
  Seashore, 30, 67.
  Secretary, 52, 17.
  Security, 12, 38.
  Seed, 47.
  Seed-seller, 66.
  Seat, 6, 33.
  Sentinel, 29, 64.
  Separation, 32.
  Sew, 43, 56.
  Shame, 38, 19.
  Shears, 59.
  Sheep’s-wool, 1, 29, 4[TN: missing digit].
  Sheet Iron, 15.
  Shell-fish, 20, 45.
  Shoemaker, 64, 9.
  Shot-gun, 12.
  Shovel, 19, 28.
  Siege, 36, 48, 30.
  Sieve, 77, 6.
  Sign, 13.
  Silk Merchant, 49.
  Silk Stockings, 26, 41.
  Silkworm, 67.
  Silversmith, 13, 28.
  Skates, 20.
  Slander, 55, 6.
  Sleigh, 40, 29.
  Smith, 37.
  Smoking, 10.
  Snail, 27, 9, 47.
  Snipe, 36, 46.
  Snuff-box, 30, 49.
  Soapboiler, 26.
  Sole-leather, 64, 10.
  Son, 19, 73.
  Song, 40.
  Soot, 74, 7.
  Sorcerer, 56, 62.
  Soup, 39, 41, 44.
  Sparrow, 8.
  Spectacles, 24, 13.
  Spice, 6, 67.
  Spider’s-web, 39.
  Spinach, 56, 49.
  Spindle, 43, 10.
  Spinning, 20, 69.
  Spinster, 63.
  Spirit, 17, 29.
  Spitting, 44, 14.
  Splendor, 37, 19.
  Spoon, 59, 17.
  Spot, 30, 47.
  Sprinkling, 66.
  Squandering, 78, 2.
  Staff, 29, 41, 22.
  Stage-driver, 11.
  Stairs, 19, 39.
  Stall, 42.
  Stallion, 7.
  Stamping, 25, 1.
  Steps, 49, 16.
  Step-sister, 52.
  Steward, 33, 11.
  Stomach, 9.
  Stone, 18.
  Stones, precious, 77, 2.
  Street, 14, 22, 63.
  Strings, 57.
  Storekeeper, 10, 64.
  Swelling, 42, 16.
  Sweet Oil, 27.
  Sweet Taste, 62, 19, 6[TN: missing digit].
  Swindler, 49, 28.
  Swindling, 8.
  Switch, 25, 42.
  Synagogue, 38, 60.

  Table, 11.
  Tailoress, 9.
  Tanner, 47, 14.
  Tape, 33, 68, 20.
  Tapestry, 58.
  Tart, 73, 10.
  Tassels, 5, 29.
  Teacher, 16.
  Temptation, 44.
  Tenant, 78, 66.
  Titles, 29, 49.
  Timepiece, 25, 62.
  Timber, 56.
  Tongs, 30.
  Tooth-pick, 3, 17, 33.
  Torture, 41.
  Tow, 10, 58.
  Traitor, 66.
  Traveller, 1, 52.
  Treasure, 7.
  Trembling, 41, 58, 17.
  Trial, 28, 42.
  Triumph, 69, 3.
  Trophy, 38, 17.
  Tumbler, 50, 68, 44.
  Turner, 59.
  Turpentine, 19.
  Type, 49, 69.

  Under-clothes, 26.
  Union, 10, 35.
  Uproar, 4, 11.

  Vengeance, 38.
  Vermacilla, 46.
  Vexation, 55, 2, 13.
  Vice, 70, 19.
  Victory, 68.
  Village, 25, 38.
  Viper, 40.

  Wages, 7, 78.
  Wagon, 67.
  Waiter, 32.
  Walls, 56, 48, 3.
  Wanderer, 9, 36.
  Want, 18.
  Wash-house, 1.
  Wash-kettle, 75, 7.
  Washer-woman, 44.
  Washing-tub, 30, 54.
  Watchmaker, 6, 46.
  Water-bucket, 29, 33, 22.
  Weasel, 57.
  Weaver, 10, 76.
  Weaving, 66, 11.
  Wedding-clothes, 23.
  Wedding-cake, 3, 68.
  Wedding-ring, 19.
  Wheel, 47, 24.
  Wheelwright, 20, 11.
  Whisper, 59, 76, 4.
  White, 39, 8.
  White Lead, 56.
  Whitewasher, 67.
  Widower, 6, 45.
  Wife, 70, 29.
  Wig-maker, 4, 77.
  Wild Animals, 25, 13.
  Wild Geese, 49.
  Wind, 56, 20, 2.
  Windmill, 33, 10.
  Wine-cellar, 18, 67.
  Wine-glass, 7.
  Winter, 39, 70.
  Witness, 29.
  Woman, 50.
  Woodcock, 6.
  Woodcutter, 28, 49.
  Wooden Spoon, 71, 5, 6.
  Woodpile, 33.
  Wool, 44, 62.
  Worship, 18, 44.
  Wound, 3.
  Wreath, 68.
  Wrestling, 2.


                     NUMBERS FOR DREAMS OF NAMES.

  Aaron, 41.
  Abel, 8.
  Abraham, 4.
  Adam, 3.
  Adolphus, 2.
  Albert, 55, 8.
  Alexander, 70.
  Alfred, 41, 74.
  Ambrose, 30, 8, 21.
  Amos, 14.
  Andrew, 6, 49.
  Anthony, 54.
  Archibald, 61.
  Arnold, 9.
  Arthur, 34, 19.
  Augustin, 10, 75.
  Augustus, 27.

  Bartholomew, 9.
  Benjamin, 18.
  Bernard, 20.
  Bertram, 49.
  Boniface, 65.

  Cæsar, 70.
  Caleb, 29.
  Cecil, 3.
  Charles, 1, 10.
  Christopher, 35.
  Clement, 49, 7.
  Conrad, 30.
  Constantine, 75.
  Cuthbert, 19, 47.

  Daniel, 63.
  David, 78.
  Denis, 21, 6.

  Edgar, 2, 60, 5.
  Edmund, 74, 4.
  Edward, 21, 8.
  Edwin, 4.
  Egbert, 28.
  Elijah, 16.
  Elisha, 14.
  Ephraim, 25, 2.
  Erasmus, 44.
  Ernest, 72.
  Eugene, 4, 13.
  Eustace, 19.
  Everard, 47, 3.
  Ezekiel, 32, 60.

  Felix, 54.
  Ferdinand, 69.
  Francis, 20.
  Frederic, 15.

  Gabriel, 17.
  Geoffrey, 33.
  George, 27, 13, 1.
  Gideon, 75, 2.
  Gilbert, 16, 30.
  Giles, 27.
  Godfrey, 55.
  Guy, 59, 5.

  Hannibal, 72.
  Harold, 4, 11.
  Hector, 13, 2.
  Henry, 18.
  Herbert, 20, 1.
  Hezekiah, 17.
  Horatio, 6.
  Hubert, 79.
  Hugh, 14.
  Humphrey, 37, 6.

  Jacob, 78.
  James, 44, 6.
  Job, 4, 10.
  Joel, 30.
  John, 4.
  Jonah, 7.
  Jonathan, 1.
  Joseph, 41.
  Joshua, 2.
  Josias, 16.

  Isaac, 58.

  Laurence, 5.
  Lazarus, 28.
  Leonard, 4.
  Leopold, 5.
  Lewis, 25.
  Lionel, 13.
  Lucius, 77, 4.
  Luke, 28.

  Mark, 47, 3.
  Martin, 34.
  Matthew, 65.
  Maurice, 3.
  Michael, 7.
  Moses, 34, 8.

  Nathaniel, 75.
  Nicolas, 6.
  Norman, 10.

  Obadiah, 40.
  Oliver, 2, 18.
  Orlando, 7.
  Owen, 53.

  Patrick, 5.
  Paul, 14.
  Percival, 11.
  Peregrine, 15, 60.
  Peter, 42.
  Philip, 19.
  Phineas, 28.

  Ralph, 24, 6.
  Reuben, 2, 11.
  Richard, 35.
  Robert, 60.
  Roger, 3, 78.
  Rowland, 75.
  Rufus, 29.

  Samson, 49.
  Samuel, 76, 4, 13.
  Saul, 5.
  Sebastian, 34.
  Simeon, 18.
  Simon, 75.
  Solomon, 12, 17.
  Stephen, 64.

  Theodore, 19.
  Theophilus, 34, 5.
  Thomas, 11.
  Timothy, 29.
  Toby or Tobias, 44.

  Valentine, 50, 1, 6.
  Vincent, 31.
  Vivian, 5.

  Walter, 11, 6.
  William, 22.

  Zaccheus, 1.
  Zachary, 10.
  Zebedee, 16.
  Zedekiah, 30.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Adeline, 7, 17, 70.
  Agatha, 9.
  Agnes, 41, 2.
  Alethea, 12.
  Alice, 42.
  Althea, 1, 70.
  Amy, Amelia, 51.
  Anna, Anne, or Hannah, 62.
  Arabella, 78.
  Aureola, 41, 6.

  Barbara, 21.
  Beatrice, 18.
  Benedicta, 6.
  Bernice, 54.
  Bertha, 3.
  Blanche, 1.
  Bridget, 61.

  Caroline, 40.
  Cassandra, 5.
  Catharine, 58.
  Cecilia, 18, 1.
  Charity, 70.
  Charlotte, 8.
  Chloe, 20, 4.
  Christiana, 10.
  Cicely, 15.
  Clara, 70.
  Constance, 68.

  Deborah, 34.
  Diana, 65.
  Dorcas, 2, 18.
  Dorothy, 2, 74.

  Edith, 29.
  Eleanor, 50.
  Eliza, Elizabeth, 2.
  Emily, 28.
  Emma, 66, 4, 8.
  Esther, 2, 17.
  Eunice, 16, 52.
  Eve, 41.

  Frances, 17, 20, 1.

  Gertrude, 75.
  Grace, 69.

  Hagar, 44.
  Helena, 51, 6.

  Isabella, 20, 71.

  Jane, 22.
  Janet, 2.
  Joan, 4.
  Joyce, 36.
  Judith, 30.
  Julia, Juliana, 47.

  Letitia, 38, 5.
  Lucretia, 7.
  Lucy, 62.
  Lydia, 41.

  Mabel, 17, 1.
  Magdalene, 4.
  Margaret, 3, 41.
  Martha, 20.
  Mary, 3, 11, 33.
  Maud, Matilda, 1, 18.
  Mercy, 53, 9.
  Mildred, 24.
  Miriam, 3.

  Nicola, 42.

  Olympia, 2, 78.

  Patience, 5, 2.
  Paulina, 21.
  Penelope, 45.
  Philippa, 3.
  Phœbe, 19.
  Phyllis, 65.
  Priscilla, 10, 11.
  Prudence, 17.

  Rachel, 6.
  Rebecca, 45.
  Rhode, 49.
  Rosa, 19.
  Rosabella, 11.
  Rosamund, 2.
  Rosecleer, 5, 14.
  Ruth, 76.


  Sapphira, 7, 19.
  Sarah, 10.
  Sophia, 73.
  Susan, Susanna, 21.

  Tabitha, 4.
  Temperance, 16.
  Theodosia, 76.
  Theresa, 14.

  Ursula, 1.


                     NUMBERS FOR DREAMS OF CARDS.

  SPADES.

  King,   65.
  Queen,  77, 8.
  Knave,   4, 17.
  Ten,     3,
  Nine,   19, 62.
  Eight,  41, 6, 30.
  Seven,  24.
  Six,     2.
  Five,   78, 12.
  Four,   55.
  Trey,   30.
  Deuce,  27.
  Ace,    77, 52.

  CLUBS.

  King,   11.
  Queen,  22, 5.
  Knave,  8, 4.
  Ten,    30, 1.
  Nine,   18.
  Eight,  77.
  Seven,   6, 70.
  Six,    20.
  Five,   74, 12.
  Four,   58.
  Trey,   33.
  Deuce,  24.
  Ace,    51, 7.

  HEARTS.

  King,   54, 7.
  Queen,  65.
  Knave,  24.
  Ten,    40, 11.
  Nine,    3, 48.
  Eight,  70, 2.
  Seven,   8, 60, 3.
  Six,    27.
  Five,    2.
  Four,    6, 21.
  Trey,   45.
  Deuce,  34, 18, 4.
  Ace,    29.

  DIAMONDS.

  King,   65.
  Queen,  30, 9.
  Knave,  47.
  Ten,     3, 11.
  Nine,   64, 30, 4.
  Eight,  58.
  Seven,  55, 5, 1.
  Six,    47, 2.
  Five,   51, 78.
  Four,   16.
  Trey,   49.
  Deuce,   7, 12.
  Ace,     6.


                  NUMBERS FOR THE DREAMS OF DOMINOES.

  Double-Six,  48.
  Six-Five,    71, 6.
  Six-Four,    30.
  Six-Three,    5.
  Six-Two,      8.
  Six-One,     54, 2.
  Six-Blank,   35.

  Double-Five, 33, 8.
  Five-Four,   16.
  Five-Three,  41, 5, 7.
  Five-Two,    30.
  Five-One,    21.
  Five-Blank,   2.

  Double-Four, 78.
  Four-Three,   4.
  Four-Two,    21, 2.
  Four-One,    50.
  Four-Blank,  48.

  Double-Three, 65.
  Three-Two,   24.
  Three-One,   16.
  Three-Blank, 30, 16, 4.

  Double-Two,  41, 3.
  Two-One,      5, 17.
  Two-Blank,    2.

  Double-One,  21.
  One-Blank,   10.
  Double Blank, (Don’t play.)


                   NUMBERS FOR DREAMS OF THE MONTHS.

  January,    26.
  February,   18.
  March,      44.
  April,      17.
  May,         3.
  June,       75.
  July,       22.
  August,     37.
  September,  18.
  October,     3.
  November,    2.
  December,   55.


                       FOR THE DAYS OF THE WEEK.

  Monday,     45.
  Tuesday,    18.
  Wednesday,   2.
  Thursday,   16.
  Friday,      2.
  Saturday,    7.
  Sunday,      1.




HOW TO FIND LUCKY NUMBERS WITH DICE.


This plan of ascertaining lucky numbers has always been exceedingly
popular with those persons who try their fortune at the lottery. The
manner of calculating a lucky number is as follows: Take two dice,
and after shaking them well in a box, throw them out, being careful
to note the whole number of spots on the uppermost sides of the dice,
then repeat this operation and again mark down the number of spots
as before. Having done this, you then consult the annexed table and
find the number of your first throw, then follow the line down until
you arrive at the number corresponding with your second throw on the
opposite side of the table. For example, we will suppose you throw the
first time, and the number of spots is equal to 4. You must then look
at the top of the line and find the Roman numeral IV. You throw the
second time and get 7 spots; this you will find on the outside column,
at the left hand, marked VII. Then all you have to do is to place your
finger on the IV. at the top of the table and follow the line down
until you arrive at VII. on the opposite side of the table, thus you
will find the number 43, which is the lucky number. Should you come to
a cypher (0) you must throw again. By following these simple directions
you can get as many good numbers as you wish to play.

                     TABLE TO FIND LUCKY NUMBERS.


     I  II  III  IV   V   VI  VII  VIII  IX  X   XI  XII
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    II  75    0  18   0   16    0    78   0  44   0   39
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   III  64   28   0   2   0    55    0   21   0  51    0
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    IV   1    0  70   0   32    0   29   48  35   0   12
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
     V  53   69   0   5   40   61    0    9  42  73    0
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    VI  46   54   7  76   38   49   11   33  27   0   66
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   VII   0   58  43   8   77    0   25   67  19   3    0
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
  VIII  50    0  22   0   65    0   72    0  36   0   47
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    IX   0   13   0  31   10    0   60   15   0   4    0
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
     X  23    0  59   0   71    0    6   68  34   0   20
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    XI   0   74  14  52   62   24    0   30   0  17    0
   ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────
   XII  57    0  41  26    0   37   63    0  45   0   56




                           THE SHIFT CHARM.


On going to bed, take off your under garment and turn it wrong side
outwards; hang it on the back of a chair, having first placed the chair
facing and in front of the bed. While doing this, repeat the following
lines:

  Husband approach! and without fear
  Sit on this chair, and thus be near
  The girl your heart doth hold most dear
  And if thy love is all sincere,
  To her, this night appear! appear!

You must then get into bed backwards, and sleep in your night-gown
without any shift. You will probably dream of seeing an agreeable young
man, in which case your marriage within that year is certain. If you do
not dream of a man, you will never marry. You should be alone in trying
this charm, for if you speak to any one, or any one in the room speaks,
it breaks it at once.




             FORTUNE-TELLING WITH A PACK OF EUCHRE CARDS.


Take a pack of thirty two cards, such as is used for the game of
Euchre. Each one of these cards has its own _particular_ signification.
But when taken in connection with other cards its signification is
termed _conditional_.


                PARTICULAR SIGNIFICATION OF THE CARDS.

                              ♠ (SPADES.)

ACE: Disagreeable tidings—perhaps news of a death.

SEVEN: Dangerous illness, or something very unpleasant.

EIGHT: Sorrow, vexation.

NINE: Quarrels, law-suits, high words, blows.

TEN: Non-fulfilment of a wish—disappointment of a cherished hope,
unforeseen accidents.

                              ♣ (CLUBS.)

ACE: A present, a testimonial of honor and distinction.

SEVEN: An inheritance, gain, profit.

EIGHT: Prosperity, wealth, success in business.

NINE: Proposals of marriage.

TEN: Good fortune in games of chance, in lottery speculations, finding
a treasure.

                             ♦ (DIAMONDS.)

ACE: A letter, news—whether good or bad is determined by the nearest
cards.

SEVEN: Travels, a campaign.

EIGHT: A ball, company.

NINE: Illness—if a knave lies on the right side, you will soon stand
godfather.

TEN: A joyful meeting—a long lost friend returned. Of the picture cards
we will speak hereafter.

                              ♥ (HEARTS.)

ACE: Quiet domestic life—tranquillity.

SEVEN: Falling in Love—Love.

EIGHT: A Surprise.

NINE: Betrothal.

TEN: A Wedding.

In explaining the cards, my dear readers, to any one, shuffle the pack
three times, and let the person who wishes to know his fortune cut it
three times in succession. Then take up the cards, and let the person
in question draw one. This drawn card you place first upon the table.
Then spread out the pack in four rows, each containing eight cards.
(_See Engraving._)

The first card is of the highest significance. In the first place it
indicates the character of the person inquiring, and according to the
following rule:

 ♠ Choleric, passionate, violent.

 ♣ Sanguine, cheerful, mirthful, witty.

 ♦ Phlegmatic, practical, unexcitable.

 ♥ Melancholic, sentimental, poetical, talented.

As, however, the human character is never without more than one of
the above named characteristics, the first card signifies the most
prominent one, and the cards which lie on the right side and below it
are reckoned with it, by which the meaning of the first card is either
modified or corroborated.

If the person in question is a lady, and she has, for example, drawn
a club, the queen of clubs is herself, the knave of clubs is her
intended, the king her father, or uncle, as the case may be. The
picture cards of the other black suit are her friends and relations.
It is the same if she has drawn hearts or diamonds, only that in this
case the picture cards of the other red suit signify her friends and
relations. If the person inquiring is a gentleman, it is the same,
except that he is the knave of the suit which he has drawn, and his
intended the queen.

From this first card, also, you form a judgment of one’s whole future
course in life. If its signification is joyful, the person’s life will
be a happy one. If, for example, it is the ace of hearts, it indicates
that the person will never be without a home, a dear and pleasant home
to him; if it is the ace of clubs, he will pass through life enjoying
honor and fame; if it is the ten of hearts with a female figure on
either side, it signifies two wives; if with a male figure on either
side, and the person inquiring is a female, two husbands.

[Illustration: EXAMPLE OF FORTUNE-TELLING WITH AN EUCHRE PACK OF CARDS.]

Thus much as to general rules. We will now instruct the reader how to
explain the cards in detail. We will suppose that it is a lady who
inquires of the cards, and endeavor, by means of an example, to give an
accurate explanation of the method to be pursued. Spread out the cards
before you, and observe carefully the different cards while you read
the fortune I shall predict from them. (_See Engraving, page 96._)

ACE OF HEARTS.—The young lady’s character, it seems, is sentimental,
melancholic, poetical, which three qualities are found more or
less together. If the next card were a heart, it would indicate a
temperament inclined to love. As, however, the adjacent cards are clubs
and spades, of which two indeed are clubs, we conclude that the lady
often displays a cheerful, sanguine disposition, yet can, at times, be
very passionate. The main feature of her character, however, is the
melancholic.

We will now look around for the lady herself—she is found to be the
seventh card on the last row. Her lover, on the other hand, is the
eighth card in the second row. As he precedes her, this signifies
that she is already acquainted with him, and they seem already to
love one another, as a love card lies at his side, and also one at
hers; no card, however, lies between them to connect them, except the
queen of diamonds. This, however, is not altogether favorable, for a
queen between a loving pair signifies a rival (for a gentleman, the
knave signifies the same), and can as well indicate a separation as a
union, notwithstanding its similarity of color. The general rule is
as follows:—If the card which connects the queen and knave is of the
same color with them, it indicates a future union between the persons.
(Hearts and diamonds form one color, as do clubs and spades.)

One thing more: from the cards which lie next to the knave, we are
enabled to judge of the character and occupation of the lady’s
intended. In the present case, the cards next to the knave of hearts
are two spades, two diamonds, and one heart; his character, therefore,
according to the rules already given, is choleric, yet at times
melancholic and sentimental. In his daily conduct he is practical and
considerate.

As to his occupation, the different colors have the following
signification:

 ♠ A student, probably a clergyman.

 ♣ A lawyer—jurist.

 ♦ A mechanic, merchant, or a person who has chosen for
himself some practical career.

 ♥ A capitalist, a genius who devotes himself to some
favorite pursuit, also a military man.

The card at the right hand is commonly the decisive one, but as, in the
present case, there is no right hand card, the one at the left takes
its place; according to this, the lady’s intended is a capitalist, a
genius, or a military man.

We now proceed to tell the lady’s fortune in its particulars.

We commence from the ace of hearts, thus: a considerable windfall will
happen in your family, young lady. Either you or your parents will draw
a prize in the lottery, or heaven will drop some other nice morsel into
your mouth (ten of clubs).

This will give occasion to a journey, which you will take with an
acquaintance (king of spades and seven of diamonds). This journey will
be very agreeable to you, and especially will you enjoy yourself at
a ball, to which you will be invited by a friend of your travelling
companion (knave of clubs and eight of diamonds). You will then dance
a cotillion with a relative of your intended, perhaps with your own
brother-in-law that is to be (knave of diamonds).

When you return home, you will find a letter, at the sight of which you
will be disturbed, the hand-writing being that of a person unfriendly
to you (queen of spades, ace of spades). You open it, and behold it
is a proposal of marriage (nine of clubs), and from a relative of the
gentleman who invited you to the ball (king of clubs), which touches
the (nine of clubs).

As, however, you promise yourself nothing but vexation (eight of
spades) from this marriage, you refuse him (ten of spades), and it will
soon appear that a better fortune lies before you (eight of clubs).
Soon after, a wedding takes place (ten of hearts), namely, that of
your sister or friend (queen of diamonds), who, therefore, does not
stand between you and your intended to separate you, but to unite you.
The bridegroom is the gentleman who was your partner in the cotillion
at that ball (knave of diamonds). At this wedding you will among
others see your intended (knave of hearts), with whom you are already
acquainted. You will also meet there a gentleman, who, when you last
saw him, was dangerously ill (seven of spades, knave of spades, and ten
of diamonds). Your intended seizes the opportunity to offer himself to
you, and you become betrothed to him (nine of hearts). You will receive
a present from a relative or friend, perhaps from your brother (ace of
clubs, and king of diamonds).

Something now occurs to separate you from your betrothed (nine of
spades). It almost seems as if you were jealous of a lady whom he
formerly loved (queen of clubs, seven of hearts). A very tender letter
which he writes to you, from a bed of sickness upon which his grief has
prostrated him (ace of diamonds, nine of diamonds), soon reconciles
you again, and as not long after something occurs which places him
in a position to support a wife in comfort (seven of clubs), the
happy marriage is celebrated. Dear relatives (king of hearts, king of
diamonds, and queen of diamonds) prepare for you joyful surprises,
which combine to render this day an infinitely happy one.

One thing more: if the ten of hearts is the last card in the last row,
the person in question will never marry; otherwise, each row counts a
year. You first count the rows until you come to the nine of hearts
(the betrothal), you then begin again and count to the ten of hearts
(the wedding), that is, in case the nine comes after the ten. If the
nine comes before the ten, you continue to count without recommencing.

The young lady in question will therefore be betrothed in from two to
three years, and will be married in about two years after, for the nine
of hearts lies in the third row, and the ten in the second row. She has
then almost five years to enjoy her single life before she becomes a
wife.


            TO FIND OUT WHOM ONE IS TO HAVE FOR A HUSBAND.

You select the four kings from a pack, and lay them side by side in a
row upon the table.

The lady who wishes to know her fortune gives to each of these cards
the name of some gentleman of her acquaintance who might be likely to
woo her in marriage. It is usual to pronounce these names aloud before
the company. The name given to the king of hearts is, however, an
exception. This secret the lady keeps to herself. To these four kings,
you can also add a queen, which then denotes the old maid.

Now, take the rest of the pack, shuffle it thoroughly, let the person
in question cut three times and commence. Under each of the above
named picture cards you lay a card in turn, and as often as a spade is
placed under a spade, a heart under a heart, &c., that is, as often as
a card of the same suit is placed under one of these picture cards, the
picture card is turned from its position.

The first time it takes a direction from left to right, the second time
it lies upside down, the third time it is raised again to a position
from right to left, and the fourth and last time it regains its former
upright position.

That one of the four kings, who, after these different changes, first
resumes his upright position, is to be the happy husband. If it should
happen to be the old maid, you can imagine what is in store for you.

After having learned from the cards who is to be the husband, the
questions next asked are, usually: How much will he love his wife,
why he marries her, and what is his profession. These questions are
answered in the following manner:

Gather up the cards, shuffle them thoroughly, and let the person cut
them three times. Then tell off the cards upon the table, as you recite
the following sentence:

  Heartily, painfully,
  Beyond all measure,
  By fits and starts,
  Not a bit in the world.

You repeat this sentence until the king of hearts makes his appearance.
If it happens that, as you lay this upon the table, you pronounce the
word  “heartily,” he will love his future wife heartily, and so on.

Now, as to why he marries her. Count off the cards upon the table,
while you repeat the following sentence:

    For love, for her beauty,
    For his parents’ command,
    For her bright, golden dollars,
    For counsel of friends.

The sentence by which you discover what is his profession is the
following:

    Gentleman, alderman, clergyman, doctor,
    Merchant, broker, professor, major,
    Mechanic, lawyer, shipmaster, tailor.

This method of telling fortunes is very entertaining in society, when
you have not the book to find more particular answers.


     A METHOD BY WHICH TO DISCOVER IF YOUR WISH WILL BE FULFILLED.

Take a pack of cards, shuffle it, and let the person inquiring cut
three times; then place singly five cards upon the table, and upon each
of these cards another, taken from the top, and so on, until the pack
is exhausted, and the cards are divided into five nearly equal heaps.

The person in question now selects a suit, spades or clubs, &c.—or a
card may previously be drawn to determine the suit.

Suppose diamonds is the chosen suit: you take up the first heap, and
throw away all the cards until you come to a matadore of diamonds.
(The matadores are the ace, king, queen, knave and ten.) You do the
same with the other heaps. If any one of the heaps does not contain a
matadore, you cast it entirely aside.

The heaps which are left you now place one upon another in order,
beginning at the left hand, and, without shuffling them, you lay them
in five heaps, and proceed as before. This time there are, of course,
fewer cards, beside matadores, than before. After having cast aside the
cards which you meet with before finding a matadore, you take up the
heaps, and, without shuffling them, lay them in five heaps, for the
third time. This third and last time, you must, if your wish is to be
fulfilled, be able to discard all the cards except the matadores. If
any other cards are left in the heaps, your wish will not be granted.




                TELLING FORTUNES BY DOMINOES AND DICE.


The telling of fortunes by the spots on Dominoes and Dice is a very
ancient custom, and has always been practised by the most celebrated
astrologers and fortune-tellers. The calculations have all to be made
by drawing a horoscope from each domino and the spots on each side of a
die; therefore the process is exceedingly tedious. We have given in the
following pages the results of three years’ experimental labor on this
subject; not constant labor, for there are but a few hours in each
year when the stars are in the right position to draw the horoscope of
any particular domino. A good many of the signs predicted here have
been proved to be correct within the personal knowledge of the writer,
and he doubts not they will all be found to be accurate.


               METHOD OF TELLING FORTUNES WITH DOMINOES.

[Illustration: Dominoes placed in a circle]

Shuffle the dominoes well on a smooth table, with their faces downward,
then draw one and see what it signifies according to the description
given below.

It is useless for any person to draw more than three dominoes at one
time of trial, or in one and the same month, as they will only deceive
themselves. Shuffle the dominoes each time of choosing; to draw the
same domino twice makes the answer stronger.

Be very particular and do not attempt to tell your fortune by dominoes
on _Friday_ or _Monday_.


                    SIGNIFICATION OF THE DOMINOES.

DOUBLE-SIX. Denotes much riches by speculation, and a happy and
prolific marriage. It is not good to farmers as far as relates to crops
and success in their calling, but it foretells that their lands will
rise in value, and that they can make money by selling out. If a girl
turns this domino to learn her fate in matrimonial matters, it is a
sign she will marry rich, and have a large family of children.

SIX-FIVE. If you are in search of employment, this domino shows
that you will succeed by proper perseverance. If in love, do not be
discouraged by any rebuffs, for success awaits you. If you have planted
a crop, or about to plant one, it will yield nobly. In money matters
exclusively, you may not be fortunate, as the domino is not lucky for
money. If your wife is about to give birth to a child, and you try your
fortune with special reference to such birth, this domino foretells its
early death. If you are about to buy real estate, you will be lucky in
the purchase—if to buy silverware, jewelry, or a watch, you will get
cheated. If you expect a legacy, you will probably be lucky and get it.

SIX-FOUR. This domino denotes early marriage and much happiness; the
sexes of the children will be about equally divided, and they will
live, but will leave home early—the girls to marry, and the boys to do
for themselves. It denotes neither poverty nor riches.

SIX-THREE. This domino denotes constancy and affection. It is an
excellent domino for lovers, who will marry early, and enjoy much
happiness. It is also a sign of riches and honors; and no troubles of
any account will mar your fortune. There is some danger, however, that
you will die at middle age, but if you survive that period you will
live to a good old age.

SIX-TWO. Is an excellent domino for lovers, as it foretells a happy
marriage. A gentleman turning this domino, will get an orderly and
economical wife, and a lady will have equal good fortune in a thrifty
and industrious husband. Those who turn this domino for luck in
business matters, will realize all and more than they expect. To
dishonest and selfish people, however, the domino is fatal. If it is
turned to determine the result of any scheme that is not fair and
above-board, it foretells ill-success and exposure. To a married
lady who expects to present her husband with an heir, it presents a
beautiful and healthy child, and one who will excel as a mathematician,
and (if a boy) will probably become distinguished.

SIX-ONE. This domino foretells to young people that they will marry
twice, and the second marriage will be the happiest of the two. To
married people it is a sign they will be better off in middle age than
when young, and that one child will be faithful and remain with them,
while the others will seek their fortunes away from home.

SIX-BLANK. If you turn this domino you will hear of the death of an
esteemed friend, or an acquaintance—will experience the loss of a
relative or member of your family—or some one will die in whom you are
interested. To a farmer, or the owner of horses or other animals, it
may denote the loss of some of the animals rather than human beings;
but it foretells death in some shape, and may even mean to warn you of
your own decease.

DOUBLE-FIVE. Is a decidedly lucky domino in everything you undertake.
It foretells success in all enterprises, but does not assure you that
you will become rich.

FIVE-FOUR. This domino shows to a lady that she will probably marry a
poor man, have a large family of children, and then become a widow. He
may be pretty well off, to appearance, when she marries him, but if it
be so, she will find that he has debts and expensive habits that will
bring him to poverty and the grave. It is not a good domino for money
matters, for if you have lost money, or if people owe you, the turning
of this domino shows that you will not be apt to get the cash. To a
farmer it is a sign of good crops; but it is also a sign that something
unfortunate will occur in connection with the farm—such as cattle lost
or injured, or property of some kind destroyed.

FIVE-THREE. Denotes ample means, without any other peculiarity of
fortune. If you turn this domino you may calculate you will never be
poor, and may become quite wealthy. But to one already wealthy, it
shows that though he may not become poor, he will never be any better
off than he then is, and perhaps not so well off. To young people
the domino denotes comfortable circumstances after marriage, but not
over-zealous love. It shows no positive bad luck in love matters, at
the same time that it does not assure you of devoted attachment of your
proposed partner for life, of either sex. On the whole, it is a pretty
fair domino for any one to turn.

FIVE-TWO. If you are in love, you will probably be unfortunate; for
though you may get the person you want, and an apparently happy
marriage may follow, it will prove an unhappy one in the end.
Nevertheless, your happiness may continue for some time after marriage.
To a gentleman this domino foretells a thrifty and industrious wife,
though one with an unhappy temper or disposition. To a single lady it
denotes thrift and independence as long as she remains single. If a man
is engaged in a speculation, or is about starting any new enterprise,
he will not be likely to succeed. If you are a candidate for office,
you will be defeated. On the whole, this is not a lucky domino for
gentlemen, though for ladies it is a pretty fair one.

FIVE-ONE. Is a jolly domino for persons fond of excitement. It predicts
that you will receive an invitation to a dinner, or social gathering,
or to some place where you will enjoy yourself. If a married lady turns
this domino it is a sign she will present her husband with a triple
addition to his family—all boys. To a young lady it predicts a beau,
who will not be rich or refined, but rather a rough customer, and she
will discard him and marry another. If you expect to earn or to receive
money, this domino is one of disappointment.

FIVE-BLANK. If a man turns it, he will be either a gambler or a rich
rogue, if he has brains enough, and if his intellect is not sufficient,
he will probably be a small swindler, or the favored lover of a lewd
woman, or both. Although these will be his characteristics, yet
circumstances may place him in a different position; but he will always
be mercenary, selfish, impudent, and without pride of character. To a
girl this domino foretells an unhappy marriage, and misfortune by that
means; but if she remains single, and keeps clear of lovers, she will
avoid the ill omen.

DOUBLE-FOUR. Is a good and smooth domino for lovers, for farmers, and
for laboring people of all kinds. On the contrary, lawyers, doctors,
or professional men who turn it, will probably have a spell of hard
times to encounter. To little girls and boys it predicts that they
will soon be invited to a party, and have much pleasure. If any one is
about to give a party, and turns this domino, he or she may count on a
first-rate time, for everything will go on well, and the party will be
a decided success. It likewise predicts that a wedding will come off
very soon.

FOUR-THREE. Those who turn this domino will marry young, live happily,
and will not probably have more than one child that will live. It
denotes neither poverty nor riches. To a couple who are childless, it
is a sign of a second marriage. If a married person who has children
turns this domino, it is a sign that the family will be reduced by
death or long absence.

FOUR-TWO. Foretells a change in your circumstances, condition, family,
relations, or your ideas. It is not known what the change will be,
but that there will really be a change, fate has ordained. It may be
nothing at all serious, or it may be something that will affect your
whole life. For instance, a young person who turns this domino may get
married—that will be an important change, but whether the marriage will
be a happy one, is not known. A married person may lose their partner—a
man may fail in business, or may become pious and join the church—a
family may break up housekeeping and take board, or may lose a favorite
child. Indeed, a thousand little incidents may occur in life which will
cause a change in your usual routine. To farmers and persons who work
hard for a living, the change will probably be a favorable or happy
one. To rich and lazy people it will be an unfortunate one. To any
other than these two classes it is uncertain what the nature of it will
be. If you have offended your lover, or any particular friend, this
domino shows that you will soon make up and become stronger friends
than ever. It is a lucky domino for farmers in business matters,
although it does not point out any particular good fortune that awaits
them.

FOUR-ONE. Those who turn this domino will marry happily, and no
uncommon event will mar their nuptials: the omen connected with it
usually points to childless couples who are well off; and I find
that where children are born, the parties will lose their wealth and
position in proportion to the number of their offspring, which will
never exceed four. In most cases there will be no children, but ample
means.

FOUR-BLANK. Is an unfortunate domino for lovers, as it foretells
quarrels and separations, old maids and old bachelors. A girl who has
a lover, and turns this domino to find out his peculiarities, had
better look somewhere else at once, for she will certainly either lose
or discard him. It is the same with a gentleman—he will never marry
the girl he then expects to, and may be jilted. To married people the
domino gives a prolific promise. A married lady who turns it will
probably have twins or triplets at her next maternity. If you think
to entrust a secret to a friend, this domino denotes that it will not
be kept. It also foretells that your future husband or wife will be a
very credulous person—perhaps a believer in Spiritualism or some other
absurd doctrine.

DOUBLE-THREE. Denotes immense riches, but has no allusion to matrimony.
It is an excellent domino for any one to turn, as it points to money
in abundance, and does not intimate any unhappiness: therefore, the
person who turns it will get plenty of cash, and be happy or not, as
fate may ordain.

THREE-TWO. Is a fortunate domino in the following cases: marriage,
love-making, recovering stolen property, going on a journey, entering
into a speculation, planting a crop, collecting a debt, or making a
purchase. This domino shows also that you may be lucky in collecting
some old claim or debt that you had given up as lost. It is bad for
gamblers, for a woman about to give birth to a child, and for peddlers.

THREE-ONE. A young girl who turns this domino will be in danger of
losing her chastity; therefore let her be careful. A married woman
turning it will have an outside admirer who will flatter her with a
view to an improper intimacy. To a man it foretells the loss of money
through his illicit intercourse with the opposite sex. It is not a
favorable domino to any one.

THREE-BLANK. This domino denotes that your sweetheart is artful and
deceitful. If you get married, your wife will be either shrewish, or
vain and unprincipled, and perhaps run away and disgrace you. To a girl
it foretells a putty-head of a husband—one who is easily influenced,
and whom she can wind round her finger. If you turn this domino, it
is a sign you will soon be invited to a party and there make a new
acquaintance, with whom you will afterwards have a quarrel. If a
married man or woman turns it, it predicts a family quarrel.

DOUBLE-TWO. The turning of this domino denotes success in love matters
and much happiness in the married state, together with good children
who will live and be prosperous. It also denotes success in any
undertaking, and thrift, though not great riches.

TWO-ONE. The turning of this domino denotes to a lady that she will
marry young, and that her husband will die, leaving her a large
property, and childless. For a long time she will be a gay, rich widow,
but will be caught at last, and marry happily. To a young man it
denotes a life of luxury; he will never marry, but will be a favorite
of the ladies, and have several mistresses. It is not a good domino for
business men, as it foretells losses by failures.

TWO-BLANK. The turning of this domino denotes poverty and bad luck. To
a marriageable young woman it predicts a poor, dissipated and dishonest
husband. On the birth of a child—if a boy, it is a sign that he will be
poor and shiftless, and perhaps dishonest—if a girl, that she will not
marry well. It is not a bad domino for a girl who lives unmarried, for
she may do very well alone. It is a domino of good luck to thieves and
bad people. If they turn it, it is a sign of success in any dishonest
undertaking. Should you turn this domino in reference to a journey, it
shows that you will go in safety. It predicts an easy deliverance in
case you are attacked and should be obliged to defend yourself.

DOUBLE-ACE. Denotes affectionate constancy and happiness in the
marriage state. It is an excellent domino to turn, both for lovers and
married people, as besides the above it indicates a competency of this
world’s goods.

DOUBLE-BLANK. To turn this domino is the worst sign in the whole set,
and is only favorable to misers, usurers, gamblers, and unprincipled
cheats and seducers. To any heartless, selfish person, the turning of
this domino foretells good luck—to all others disappointment. We hope
that no young girl turning a domino to ascertain her fortune as to
marriage will turn this one, for it surely foretells disappointment and
sorrow. If she has a lover, and should he marry her, he will desert
her afterwards. In business matters, too, it is decidedly unfavorable,
and is a sign that your business will decrease. If you are wanting a
situation, you will not be likely to get it, and if anything is lost
or stolen, it will not probably be recovered again. It is generally
a pretty bad domino for decent people—but a good one for all the
dishonest ones, who, if they have got anything by trickery and fraud,
will be apt to enjoy it.


                 METHOD OF TELLING FORTUNES WITH DICE.

Take three dice, shake them well in the box with your left hand, and
then cast them out on a board or table, on which you have previously
drawn a circle with chalk; count the number of spots on the uppermost
sides of the dice, and look at the signification of the numbers, as
given below. Be careful and do not attempt to tell your fortune on
Mondays or Wednesdays, as they are unlucky days for dice. To throw the
same number twice at one trial, shows news from abroad, be the numbers
what they may. If the dice roll over the circle, the number thrown goes
for nothing, but the occurrence shows sharp words, and if they fall to
the floor, it is blows; in throwing out the dice, if one remains on top
of the other, it is a present of which I leave the ladies to take care.


                  SIGNIFICATION OF THE SPOTS ON DICE.

THREE. If a young girl throws this number, (three aces,) it foretells
that she will have numerous lovers, and if she marries will have a good
crop of children, and then become a widow. To a young man it denotes
that he will never marry, but will be a great favorite of the ladies,
and probably a gay seducer. If a married person throws it, he or she
will become a widower or widow, as the case may be.

FOUR. To throw this number denotes frivolity in love matters. Unmarried
persons who throw it will have many lovers or sweethearts, and will not
be fully satisfied with either. It foretells to a married woman that
her husband admires the sex generally quite as much as he does her; but
it also denotes that she will have many children, and that both herself
and husband will live to raise them.

FIVE. To throw this number of spots of the dice, foretells good luck
in a land speculation to any one who is about buying lands. It is a
very good number for farmers, prognosticating a fortunate season to
come. To lovers it shows that some obstacle will present itself to
their marriage, or else that they will quarrel. In a family it is a
sign that some person will soon visit there that is not welcome. If you
are about to go a journey, and throw this number, you will meet some
one who will bother you, or that you dislike, or else some disagreeable
accident will happen; but the accident will not be serious.

SIX. If a girl throws this number, (three deuces,) it denotes that she
will be of gay disposition and have many lovers, but will never marry;
if she escapes illicit connections, she will be fortunate, and probably
get some money by will. To a young man it denotes that he will marry
a gay wife, who will be of loose principles; and also that he himself
will keep a mistress, and perhaps become a gambler. He will not be poor
as long as he is young and attractive, but he will either die young or
become poor in middle age. To gamblers, the throwing of this number is
a sign of success in winning money.

SEVEN. If a man throws this number it foretells that he will never
marry, but will be lucky in business speculations. A young lady who
throws it will be apt to marry a wealthy husband, though he may not
be an agreeable companion. To farmers and mechanics it is not a
particularly bad number, though it does not promise them much success,
and it foretells that they will have pretty hard work to keep even with
the world.

EIGHT. This is the miser’s throw; those who throw it will probably
be well off, though not rich. It foretells a miserly or stingy
disposition, and a character too close in money matters to be very
prosperous. If a girl throw this to test the character of her lover,
she may be assured that he will not be poor, though it is possible he
may lead her an unhappy life from his selfish and penurious habits.

NINE. If you throw this number with the dice with reference to your
future husband or wife, be assured that you will be lucky in your
choice. It foretells an orderly, energetic and industrious person. I
should not want a better wife than this number predicts. To a young
girl it does not promise riches with a husband, but it foretells thrift
and plenty, and that she may be rich, too. It is a fair business throw
also—foretelling pretty good luck in everything except games of chance,
and predicting bad luck in such games.

TEN. If a young girl throws this number, she will not marry very soon,
and perhaps not at all; but she will have good luck in other matters,
and rise above her present position in society. If a man throws it, he
will get a rich wife. It is a favorable number to the male sex in love
matters. A married woman who throws it will rise in the world, or have
a legacy left to her.

ELEVEN. This throw foretells extravagance and fondness of show and
display. Those who throw it, or for whose fortune it may be thrown,
will probably have the command of means, but all will be spent in
gimcracks, parties of pleasure, and in adorning the person; and though
they may not come to poverty, they will leave nothing but debt to
their heirs. To laboring people it denotes that they will be always in
debt, and live above their means.

TWELVE. Shows that an event of some kind is soon to occur in your
affairs, either for good or evil. To a farmer or a laboring man it
will probably be fortunate, but it may be otherwise. To a banker, a
money-dealer, or a jeweler, it is generally a bad omen—to other trades,
uncertain. It has no special reference to love matters.

THIRTEEN. I hope no virtuous young girl will ever be so unfortunate as
to throw this number, unless she be possessed of a resolution as firm
as a rock, for it foretells that she will be sorely tempted to become
profligate. It is emphatically the throw of an unchaste female. If a
man throws this number, it is a sign that he will never marry, but will
associate with harlots, or live with a woman who is not his wife; if he
throws it with a view to discover the character of his lady-love, he
may guess the result.

FOURTEEN. This is the gambler’s throw, and denotes dishonesty and an
unprincipled disposition in men, and misfortune in women. If a man
throws it, he will be either a gambler or a rich rogue, if he has
brains enough, and if his intellect is not sufficient, he will probably
be a small swindler, or the favored lover of a lewd woman, or both.
Although these will be his characteristics, yet circumstances may place
him in a different position, but he will always be mercenary, selfish,
impudent, and without pride of character. To a girl this number
foretells an unhappy marriage, and misfortune by that means; but if she
remains single, and keeps clear of lovers, she will avoid the ill omen.

FIFTEEN. If you are a speculating character—a buyer of lottery tickets
or lottery policies, or are engaged in any games of chance, such as
gambling, horse-racing, shooting at a mark, betting, or in fact any
scheme that you expect to win money by, this number foretells bad luck
and discomfiture. If you try to test your luck in any such matters, and
this number turns up, you may be sure you will lose, and had better
give up at once. If you want to buy land, you will be apt to get a good
bargain and be fortunate. This number foretells good luck to a farmer
putting in his crops, and the same to a girl choosing a husband; for
though she may not get a rich man, yet he will be industrious, thrifty,
comfortable, and good-hearted. To consumptive people this throw is not
a favorable one, as in many cases it predicts a short life to them.

SIXTEEN. This is an unlucky number to a merchant, a banker, or a
mechanic. It foretells bad luck of some kind, though it is generally
a forerunner of a brisk and profitable business. An excellent run of
business may come first, and the bad luck afterwards, or _vice versa_,
but the misfortune is sure to come in somewhere. To a farmer this throw
foretells abundant crops, and to a gold-digger good luck and plenty
of the precious metal. A young girl who throws it will get a thrifty
husband, and have a numerous family.

SEVENTEEN. If you are a girl, and think of getting married, you will
be apt to lose your lover unless he is a farmer, a gardener, a
well-digger, a gold-miner, a brewer, a coal-heaver, a grave-digger,
or some occupation that makes him use a shovel a good deal. If you
think of marrying any such man, this throw is a good one. For a man
of any other occupation, it foretells disappointment. To a young man,
this number shows that by perseverance and industry he will do well in
the world—that his luck will be good if he only tries his best to get
along. If you have had anything stolen from you, or have lost valuable
property while walking or riding, this throw is unfavorable; you will
probably never recover what you have lost.

EIGHTEEN. People who throw this number may congratulate themselves,
as it foretells riches, honors, and a happy and contented life. It
predicts unexceptionable prosperity in all kinds of business, good luck
in love matters, and advancement to those who are honorably ambitious.
To rogues and dishonest people it is an omen of discomfiture, detection
and punishment.




                              PALMISTRY,

             OR TELLING FORTUNES BY THE LINES OF THE HAND.


Many people think the predictions from lines in the hand are all
guess-work, but it is a mistake, for they are determined by simple
rules and long observation. Let us explain the matter:

In the first place each finger has its name.

  (1)  Forefinger:         Jupiter  ♃
  (2)  Middle finger:      Saturn   ♄
  (3)  Ring finger:        The Sun  ⨀
  (4)  Little finger:      Mercury  ☿
  (5)  Thumb:              Venus    ♀

Each hand has five main lines.

  (1)  The Life line:        L. Vitalis.
  (2)  The Natural line:     L. Naturalis.
  (3)  The Table line:       L. Mensalis.
  (4)  The Liver line:       L. Hepatica.
  (5)  The Wrist line:       L. Rascetta.

(_See Engraving._)


                           1. LINEA VITALIS.

If this line is wanting or nearly so, it is by no means a good sign. It
signifies a feeble understanding, a faint heart, and a short, sickly
life. This, however, is not the signification in every case; it often
indicates, especially with the ladies, changeableness of feeling, a
disposition easily influenced by others, and a proneness to enthusiasm.

[Illustration: Palm of hand showing the principle lines viz.
  _mensalis_  _naturalis_  _hepatica_  _vitalis_  _rascetta_]

The length of life is in proportion to the length of the line of Life.
It begins between ♃ and ♀ and it is here that you commence with the
prophecy.

Each knot in this line denotes an obstacle, or, at least, something
momentous in life. Each crossing by smaller lines, some unpleasant
occurrence. The larger the cross, the greater the misfortune.

In most cases one or more lines run from the Natural line to the line
of Life. This indicates the partner of one’s life. The point where the
junction takes place denotes the point of time of the marriage. If this
occurs near the commencement of the line, of course the marriage will
take place early in life. If two lines unite with the line of Life it
indicates two husbands (or wives). If no line joins it, the person will
remain unmarried.

The clearer and more distinct the line of Life, the happier the
person’s life. When it is fine, deep and sharply defined, it denotes an
energetic, and at the same time a noble character.


                          2. LINEA NATURALIS.

A regular length and good appearance of this line denotes excellent
digestive organs. Large crosses occurring in its course signify
imprudence, precipitation.


                          3. LINEA MENSALIS.

If it is well defined it indicates an amorous temperament; if
accompanied by a side line, it signifies good fortune in love and
wedlock. If it is very broad, happiness in domestic life. If it is
interrupted it denotes that sad calamity, infidelity.


                          4. LINEA HEPATICA.

If it is complete and tolerably long, it promises robust health, a
clear understanding, and good humor. If it throws out branches near its
commencement it signifies wit, acuteness, presence of mind, a spirit of
mischief, perhaps falsehood.


                          5. LINEA RASCETTA.

When it is complete and unbroken, it denotes good fortune in all
matters of importance.

From the ring finger (Solis ⨀) there commonly runs one or more lines
into the Linea Mensalis. These denote the various inclinations of
the heart. If but a single line is actually visible, and if this is
deep and long, the person loves or will love faithfully and warmly.
If a number of smaller lines are found in its place, the person is
inconstancy itself, a butterfly roving from flower to flower. Add up
all these little lines, and the sum will give you the number of times
the person will fall in love.




                      PHRENOLOGY AND PHYSIOGNOMY.


The science of Phrenology teaches how to discover from the formation
of the skull the qualities of the soul, and to draw conclusions as to
the character of an individual. The whole head, accordingly, is divided
into organs. The following are the principal ones, and are all that are
necessary for the reader’s instruction. To enter more deeply into the
subject would exceed our limits.

  1. Memory.
  2. Causality.
  3. Benevolence.
  4. Approbativeness.
  5. Painting.
  6. Energy.
  7. Imagination.
  8. Inclination to Melancholy.
  9. Mischievousness.

(_See Engraving._)

[Illustration: Head showing location of the above organs.]

According as these organs are more or less elevated and well formed
that peculiarity of character which they indicate is more or less
present.

PHYSIOGNOMY, OR THE FEATURES OF THE HEAD AND FACE, teaches us to judge
of the character of a person and of events connected with his destiny
from the shape, color and expression of his features. If my fair
readers would like to know how many husbands they are to have, they
have only to knit their eyebrows closely together, and count the folds
of the skin formed by this movement.

If they wish to see how many years they have to live, let them elevate
their brows as much as possible, and then count the cross folds in the
forehead. Subtract the number found from one hundred, and the remainder
is the number of the years which it is allotted you to pass upon this
earth.

OF THE NOSE. A bold, projecting nose, usually called a Roman nose,
denotes an enterprising temper. In general a large nose is a good sign.
A long nose is a sign of good sense, a stumpy one generally indicates
the contrary. A perfectly straight nose denotes a high and noble
spirit, unless the expression of the eyes contradicts this judgment,
and then it denotes great stupidity. A turned up nose signifies a
spirit of mischief, wit, forwardness, that is, if it is not too
stumpy. A very small nose indicates good nature, yet at the same time
a complete want of energy. A red nose denotes a cheerful temper, or an
inclination to drink, as all the world knows.

OF THE LIPS. Very thick lips indicate either great stupidity or very
great genius. Very fine thin lips denote falsehood, especially if
they are usually compressed. Swelling lips, if generally compressed,
denote great decision of character, a philosophical turn of mind, and
oftentimes somewhat of obstinacy. A mouth always open says as plain as
words can speak,  “I am a calf.”

OF DIMPLES. Dimples in the cheeks signify roguery. But the dimple in
the chin the God of Love has himself imprinted with his own divine
finger.

OF THE EYE. The soul, however, dwells particularly in the eyes, and the
faculty is inborn with every man to understand their language without
ever having studied it. At least it should be so; the eyes should be
like an open book, which all may read and understand. But as all eyes
are not to be trusted, and will sometimes lead you astray, I will give
you, my dear readers, a few rules to guide you in your path through
life.

A clear eye, with the pupil in continual, slightly tremulous movement,
denotes a good memory, yet something of selfishness with slowness of
comprehension.

An eye which, while the person speaks, roves hither and thither,
denotes a deceiver. Very quiet eyes which have an imposing effect
upon you, and embarrass you by their great repose, signify great
self-command, yet, at the same time, great self-complacency.

Eyes which ordinarily appear impressive, yet often suddenly flash forth
a clear pleasant light, denote true-heartedness and honesty, coupled
with a sound understanding.

Eyes which have always an inquisitive expression in them, and then
suddenly, when they turn to address a person, have an exceedingly kind
expression, are not to be trusted. This indicates a suspicious temper,
and he who does not trust his fellow-man, can seldom himself be trusted.

An eye in which the white has a yellowish tinge, and is streaked with
reddish veins, denotes vehement passions.

Very blue eyes, betray a temper inclined to coquetry.

Gray eyes, intelligence.

Greenish, falsehood, and a disposition to tittle-tattle.

Yellowish, great phlegm.

Black, a passionate lively temperament.

Brown, a kind, good, happy disposition.

A pair of eyes which looks every one cheerfully and frankly in the
face, with an air of simple joy and unaffected innocence, yet, when
surprised, droops to the ground, with a certain sly bashfulness, or,
when offended by another’s glance, turns aside blushing and confused,
such a pair of eyes, indicates an amiable character, a faithful heart,
a sound understanding, and a pure soul.

A being with such a pair of eyes we cannot help loving, let the eyes be
black, brown, blue, gray, green, or yellow, let the nose be stumpy, and
the features ill-shaped, no one can help regarding their possessor with
a feeling of hearty kindness and good will, if not with actual love.

OF THE EYE-BROWS. Upright eyebrows are amiable; the eyebrows hanging
over, indicate an effeminate person; the brows very hairy, denote an
industrious, affectionate man; the brows extending to the temples,
usually signify a slovenly man.

OF THE EARS. Open ears usually indicate but little reason; great ears
not too much wisdom; very small ears foolishness; square ears of medium
size, prudence.

OF THE NOSTRILS. The nostrils thick and strong, betoken strength; if
round, fair, and drawn in length, they are a sign that the person is
merry and courageous; if narrow and round, they are mostly indicative
of an envious and foolish person.

OF THE MOUTH. A very large mouth, with the upper lip hanging over,
usually signifies a foolish, unsteady person, a rash man and a babbler.
A mouth not too large, indicates a bold and courageous man; and a small
mouth, a clever man.

OF THE FACE. A lean face is an indication of a wise man; the face plain
and fat, denotes a person addicted to strife. The face without any
rising and swelling, indicates a penurious person; a sad face sometimes
denotes foolishness, and at other times wisdom; a fat face indicates a
man to be inclined to untruth; a round face signifies folly; a great
face denotes a man slow about business; a well-proportioned face
indicates a person to have virtuous qualities.

OF THE NAILS ON THE FINGERS. Broad nails show the person to be bashful,
fearful, but of gentle nature. When there is a certain white mark at
the extremity of them, it shows that the person has more honesty than
subtlety. White long nails denote much sickness, but are sometimes
indicative of strength and deceit. If upon the white anything appears
at the extremity that is pale, it denotes short life; but if the white
is clear and smooth, it signifies long life.

OF THE HEAD. A large head shows a person stupid, and dull of
apprehension; also a very small head signifies the same; but the head
of a man being neither great nor small, is the prognostic of a wise
man; for all extremes are irregular and a deviation from nature, and
experience has made it manifest, that a great head and small members do
always produce great indiscretion and folly in either man or woman; but
we must also consider the several parts of the head: and first,

OF THE FOREHEAD. A large forehead shows a liberal man; but the
forehead narrow, denotes a foolish person; a long forehead shows one
apt to learn; a high forehead, swelling and round, is a sign of a
crafty man, and a coward; a forehead full of wrinkles, shows a man to
be envious and crafty.

But in forming your opinions of men from these or other indications,
you should always bear in mind that there is no rule without an
exception.




                       FORTUNE-TELLING BY MOLES.


These little marks on the skin, although they appear to be the effect
of chance, or accident, and might easily pass with the unthinking
for things of no moment, are nevertheless of the utmost consequence,
since from their color, situation, size, and figure, may be accurately
gathered the temper of, and the events that will happen to the person
bearing them; though moles are, in their substances, nothing else
than excrescences, or ebullitions which proceed from the state of
the blood whilst the fœtus is confined in the womb, yet they are not
given in vain, as they are generally characteristic of the disposition
and temper of those that bear them; and it is also proved by daily
experience, that from the shape, situation, and other circumstances,
they bear a strong analogy to the events which are to happen to a
person in future life. But before I presume to give any directions
to those who are to form the prognostic, who are desirous to be duly
enabled to pronounce an infallible judgment, I shall, in the first
place, teach you herein the common prognostications by moles found
in the various parts of the body, according to the doctrine of the
ancients. And, first, it is essentially necessary to know the size
of the mole, its color, whether it be perfectly round, oblong, or
angular; because each of these will add to or diminish the force of the
indication. The larger the mole, the greater will be the prosperity or
adversity of the person; the smaller the mole, the less will be his
good or evil fate. If the mole is round, it indicates good; if oblong,
a moderate share of fortunate events; if angular, it gives a mixture
of good and evil; the deeper the color, the more it announces favor or
disgrace; the lighter, the less of either. If it is very hairy, much
misfortune may be expected; if but few long hairs grow upon it, it
denotes that your undertakings will be prosperous.

We shall further remark only, that moles of a middling size and color
are those which we are now going to speak of. The rest may be gathered
from what we have just above mentioned, but as it may frequently happen
that modesty will sometimes hinder persons from showing their moles,
you must depend upon their own representation of them for your opinion.


                        SIGNIFICATION OF MOLES.

ARM. (_Right or Left._) Show a courteous disposition, great fortitude,
resolution, industry, and conjugal fidelity; it foretells that the
person will fight many battles, and be successful in all; that you will
be prosperous in your undertakings, obtain a decent competency, and
live very happy—it denotes that a man will be a widower at forty, but
in a woman it shows that she will be survived by her husband.

ANKLE. Shows an effeminate disposition, given to foppery in dress,
and cowardice in a man; but in a woman it denotes courage, wit, and
activity—they foretell success in life with an agreeable partner,
accumulation of honors and riches, and much pleasure in the affairs of
love.

ANUS. Around outside this place, a mole predicts that you will be
indolent, shiftless and poor, though of good capacity.

ARM-PITS. You will be very good looking, will become rich, and be
benevolent.

BACK. If just below either of the shoulder blades, it signifies
that you will have misfortune and defeat in the enterprises you may
undertake.

BELLY. Shows an indolent, slothful disposition, given to gluttony, very
selfish, addicted to the pleasures of love and drink, negligent of
dress, and cowardly; it denotes small success in life, many crosses,
some imprisonment, and travelling, with losses by sea; but it foretells
that you will marry an agreeable partner of a sweet temper, have
children, who will be industrious and become very respectable in life.

BOSOM. Shows a quarrelsome and unhappy temper, given to low debauchery,
and exceedingly amorous, indolent and unsteady; it denotes a life
neither very prosperous nor very miserable, but passed without many
friends or much esteem.

BREAST. A mole on the right breast shows an intemperate and indolent
disposition, rather given to drink, strongly attached to the joys of
love; it denotes much misfortune in life, with a sudden reverse from
riches to poverty—many unpleasant and disagreeable accidents, with a
sober and industrious partner—many children, mostly girls, who will all
marry well, and be a great comfort to your old age; it warns you to
beware of pretended friends, who will harm you much. A mole on the left
breast shows an industrious and sober disposition, amorous, and much
given to walking; it denotes great success in life and in love, that
you will accumulate riches, and have many children, mostly boys, who
will make their fortunes by sea.

A mole under the left breast under the heart, shows a rambling,
unsettled disposition, given to drinking and little careful of your
actions; very amorous, and much given to indulge indiscriminately in
the pleasures of love, in a man. In a woman it indicates sincerity in
love, industry, and a strict regard for character; in life it denotes a
varied mixture of good and bad fortune, the former rather prevailing;
it denotes imprisonment for debt, but not of long duration. To a woman
it denotes easy labors, and children who will become rich, live happy
and respected, and marry well.

BUTTOCKS. Signifies shiftlessness and poverty, though a good capacity;
it is a sign that you will be too lazy to do anything for yourself.

CHEEK. A mole on either cheek, shows an industrious, benevolent and
sober disposition, given to be grave and solemn, little inclined to
amorous sports, but of a steady courage and unshaken fortitude; it
denotes a moderate success in life, neither becoming rich nor falling
into poverty—it also foretells an agreeable and industrious partner,
with two children, who will do better than the parents.

CHIN. A mole on the chin shows an amiable and tranquil disposition,
industrious and much inclined to travelling, and the joys of Venus; it
denotes that the person will be highly successful in life, accumulating
a large and splendid fortune, with many respectable and worthy friends,
an agreeable conjugal partner, and fine children, but also indicates
losses by sea and in foreign countries.

EAR. On either ear it denotes riches in man or woman. If on the lower
tip of the ear, keep off the water, or you will be drowned.

ELBOW. A mole on either elbow shows a restless and unsteady
disposition, with a great desire for travelling—much discontented
in the married state and of an idle turn; it indicates no very
great prosperity, rather a sinking than rising condition, with many
unpleasant adventures, much to your discredit—marriage to a person who
will make you unhappy, and children who will be disobedient, and cause
you much trouble.

EYE. A mole on the outside corner of either eye shows a sober, honest,
and steady disposition, much inclined to the pleasures of love;
it foretells a violent death, after a life considerably varied by
pleasures and misfortunes; in general it foreshadows that poverty will
keep at a distance.

EYEBROW. A mole on the right eyebrow signifies a sprightly, active
disposition, a great turn for gallantry, much courage, and great
perseverance; it denotes wealth and success in love, war and business;
that you will marry an agreeable mate, live happy, have children,
and die in an advanced old age, at a distance from home. On the
left eyebrow, temple, or side of the forehead, shows an indolent
peevish temper, a turn for debauchery and liquor, little inclined to
amorous sports and very cowardly; foretells poverty, imprisonment and
disappointments in all your undertakings, with undutiful children, and
a bad-tempered partner.

FINGER. On either finger of either hand, it shows that you will be a
thief, or a dishonest person in some way, and never wealthy.

FOOT. A mole on either foot shows a melancholy and inactive
disposition, little inclined to the pleasures of love, given to
reading and a sedentary life; they foretell sickness and unexpected
misfortunes, with many sorrows and much trouble, an unhappy choice of a
partner for life, with disobedient and unfortunate children.

FOREHEAD. If the mole is in the centre of the forehead it predicts an
active, industrious disposition, success in business, riches, honors, a
happy marriage, and a son who will be distinguished. But if the mole
is on the side of the forehead, the signification is not so favorable,
particularly if on the left side. (_See Eyebrow._) On the right side
of the forehead, or right temple, shows an active and industrious
disposition, much given to the sports of love; it denotes that she will
be very successful in life, marry an agreeable partner, and arrive at
unexpected riches and honors, and have a son, who will become a great
man.

GROIN. On the right groin denotes riches and honors, but to be
accompanied with disease. On the left groin, you will have the sickness
without the wealth.

GULLET. On that part of the throat called the gullet, it predicts that
you will be distinguished in some way and become rich.

HAND. Moles on either hand, if not on the fingers, denote wealth,
industry and energy in either sex. You will also be fortunate and happy
in your children.

HEART. Over the heart, denotes wickedness, poverty and a hasty,
headstrong disposition. (_See Breast._)

HEEL. Shows a spiteful and malevolent disposition, but a person of much
energy, who may be successful in what he undertakes; that he will be
greatly talked about behind his back.

HIP. A mole on either hip shows a contented disposition, given to
industry, amorous and faithful in engagements, of an abstemious turn;
it foretells moderate success in life, with many children, who will
undergo many hardships with great fortitude, and arrive at ease and
affluence, by dint of their industry and ingenuity.

KNEE. A mole on the left knee shows a hasty and passionate disposition,
extravagant and inconsiderate turn, with no great inclination
to industry and honesty, much given to the pleasures of Venus,
but possessed of much benevolence; it indicates good success in
undertakings, particularly in contracts, a rich marriage, and an only
child. On the right knee, shows an amiable temper, honest disposition
and a turn for amorous pleasures and industry; it foretells great
success in love, and the choice of a conjugal partner, with few
sorrows, many friends, and dutiful children.

LEG. Moles on either leg show a person of a thoughtless, indolent
disposition, of an amorous turn, much given to extravagance and
dissipation; it denotes many difficulties through life, but that you
will surmount them all; it shows that imprisonment will happen to you
at an early age, but that in general you will be more fortunate than
otherwise; you will marry an agreeable person, who will survive you, by
whom you will have four children, two of which will die young.

LIPS. A mole on either lip shows a delicate appetite, a sober
disposition, and much given to the pleasures of love, of an industrious
and benevolent turn; it denotes that the person will be successful in
undertakings, particularly in love affairs—that you will rise above
your present condition, and be greatly respected and esteemed—that you
will endeavor to obtain some situation, in which you will at first
prove unsuccessful, but afterward prevail.

MONS. If a woman have a mole here, she will become the mother of a
great genius, or else the wife of a distinguished personage. It is also
a sign of riches.

MOUTH. (_See Lips._)

NAVEL. On a woman it denotes many children, a good husband, and an
abundance of this world’s goods. On a man it is a sign he will be lucky
in all he undertakes, become very rich, and that he will have a son who
will be distinguished.

NECK. In front of the neck is a good sign; you will rise to unexpected
honors and dignities, or become rich. On the back of the neck it
denotes misfortune. On either side of the neck it foretells that you
will become wicked or quarrelsome; and if on the right side, behind the
ear, it is a sign that you will be hung.

NIPPLE. In woman it is a sign that she will have a child that will
become famous and distinguished in the world. In man it denotes that
he will be fond of women, and spend much of his life in amours, to the
neglect of his proper business.

NOSE. Moles on any part of the nose, show a hasty and passionate
disposition, much given to amorous pleasures, faithful to engagements,
candid, open, and sincere in friendship, courageous and honest, but
very petulant, and rather given to drink; it denotes great success
through life and in love affairs—that you will become rich, marry
well, have fine children and be much esteemed by your neighbors and
acquaintance—that you will travel much, particularly by water.

NOSTRIL. Inside the nostril shows that you will be energetic and
persevering, and well off in the world; that you will get a good wife
or husband when you marry.

PRIVATE MEMBERS. Moles on these parts show a generous, open and
honest disposition, extremely disposed to gallantry, and the joys of
Venus, given to sobriety, and of undaunted courage; it denotes great
success in the latter part of life, but many and severe misfortunes in
the former, which will be borne with fortitude; it also foretells a
happy marriage and fine children, who will be happy, thrive well, and
grow rich and respectable: in man it shows that he will have natural
children, who will cut a great figure in life, but he will experience
much plague and vexation from their mother.

SHIN. (_See Leg._)

SHOULDER. On the left shoulder shows a person of a quarrelsome, unruly
disposition, always inclined to dispute for trifles, rather indolent,
but much inclined to the pleasures of love, and faithful to the
conjugal vows. It denotes a life not much varied either with pleasures
or misfortunes; they indicate many children, and moderate success in
business, but dangers by sea. On the right shoulder shows a person of
a prudent and discreet temper, one possessed of much wisdom, given to
great secrecy, very industrious, but not very amorous, yet faithful to
conjugal ties; it indicates great prosperity and advancement in life, a
good partner, and many friends, with great profit from a journey to a
distant country, about the age of thirty-five.

SIDE. On either side, near any part of the ribs, shows an indolent,
cowardly disposition, given to excessive drinking, of an inferior
capacity, and little inclined to the pleasures of love; it denotes an
easy life, rather of poverty than riches, little respected, a partner
of an uneven and disagreeable temper, with undutiful children, who will
fall into many difficulties.

STOMACH. If in the pit of the stomach, it shows a person of foppish
disposition, with little common sense, though much industry; it also
denotes riches. If lower down on the stomach, it is a sign that you
will promise more than you will perform, but will nevertheless be
highly esteemed.

THIGH. On the right thigh, it shows the person to be of an agreeable
temper, inclined to be amorous, and very courageous: it also denotes
success in life, accumulation of riches by marriage, and many fine
children, chiefly girls. On the left thigh, shows a good and benevolent
disposition, a great turn for industry, and little inclined to the
pleasures of love: it likewise indicates many sorrows in life, great
poverty, unfaithful friends, and imprisonment by the false swearing of
some one.

THROAT. It predicts a fortunate and wealthy marriage to either sex.
(_See Neck._)

TONGUE. If a man shall have a mole on his tongue, it foretells that
he shall marry with a rich and beautiful woman of great celebrity.
On a woman’s tongue it denotes reserve of manner and wisdom; also a
fortunate marriage.

WRIST. Moles on the wrist, or between that and the finger ends, show
the person to be of an ingenious and industrious turn, faithful in
his engagements, amorous and constant in his affections, rather of a
saving disposition, with a great degree of sobriety and regularity
in his dealings. It foreshows a comfortable acquisition of fortune,
with a good partner, and beautiful children, but some disagreeable
circumstances will happen about the age of thirty, which continue four
or five years. In a man, it denotes being twice married—in a woman only
once, but that she will survive her husband.


                   TO CHOOSE A HUSBAND BY THE HAIR.

BLACK. Generally healthy, but apt to be cross; fond where he fixes his
attachment, and likely to make a good husband, and be careful of his
family: but if short and curly, is usually of an unsettled temper, apt
to show a want of prudence and carefulness in early life.

WHITE OR FAIR HAIR. Usually of a weak and sickly constitution, fond of
music, and will cut no great figure in the world.

YELLOW. Fond, but inclinable to jealousy; and not always industrious.

LIGHT BROWN. Sensible and good-humored, careful and attentive, and, if
saving of his income, generally makes a good husband; but is apt to be
otherwise.

DARK BROWN. Neither very good nor very bad, middling in all respects,
but may be regarded as a pretty good character.

VERY DARK BROWN. Of a robust constitution, and of a grave disposition,
but sometimes not very good-tempered and sensible, and kind to a good
wife.

RED. Will be cunning, artful, and fond of female companions; and be
generally of a lively temper, and sometimes careless of money.


                      SIGNIFICATION OF THE NAILS.

BROAD NAILS. The person that hath the nails thus, is of gentle nature,
good, and pusillanimous, and a great fear to speak before great
persons, or those by whom they are in subjection; as also being guilty
of extreme bashfulness.

If about these nails there happens to be an excoriation of the flesh,
which is commonly called points—in these large nails it signifies the
party given to luxury, yet fearful, but usually given to excess.

When there is at the extremity a white mark, it signifies ruin through
negligence. The party has more honesty than subtlety.

WHITE NAILS. He that hath the nails white and long, is sickly, and
subject to much infirmity by fevers; he is neat but not very strong,
because of his indispositions, much addicted to the company of women by
whom he will be greatly deceived.

NARROW NAILS. The person with such nails, is desirous of attaining
knowledge in the sciences; but is never long at peace with his
neighbors. But if to narrowness they add some degree of length, the
person will be led away by ambitious propensities, always aiming at
things which he will be unable to obtain.

ROUND NAILS. These declare a hasty person, yet good-natured and very
forgiving; a lover of knowledge, liberal sentiment, doing no one any
harm, and acting by his own principles, but too proud of his own
abilities.

LONG NAILS. When the nails are long, the person is of a good-natured
turn, but placing confidence in no man, being from his youth familiar
with duplicity, but not practising it, from his strict adherence to
virtue.

FLESHY NAILS. This description of nail indicates an idler, loving to
sleep, eat, and drink; not delighting in bustle and busy life; one who
prefers a narrow income without industry, to one of opulence to be
acquired by activity and diligence.

LITTLE NAILS. Little round nails discover a person to be obstinately
angry, seldom pleased, inclining to hate every one, as conceiving
himself superior to others, though without any reason.

PALE OR LEAD-COLORED NAILS. A melancholy person, one who through choice
leads a sedentary life, and would willingly give up all things for the
sake of study, and to improve in the learned and metaphysical branches
of philosophy.

RED AND SPOTTED NAILS. Choleric and martial, delighting in cruelty
and war; his chief pleasure being in plundering towns, where every
ferocious particle in human nature is glutted to satiety.

When you find any black spots upon the nails, they always signify evil,
as white ones are a token of good.




               FORTUNE-TELLING BY TEA OR COFFEE GROUNDS.


TO POUR OUT THE GROUNDS OF A TEA OR COFFEE CUP.—Pour the grounds of
coffee or tea into a white cup, shake them well about in it, so that
their particles may cover the surface of the whole cup; then reverse it
into the saucer, that all the superfluous parts may be drained, and the
figures required for fortune-telling be formed.

The person who acts as the fortune-teller, must always bend his or her
thoughts upon him or her who is to have their fortune told, and on
their rank in life, and profession, in order to give plausibility to
the predictions. It is not to be expected that upon taking up the cup,
the figures will be accurately represented as they are in reality, but
it will be quite sufficient if they bear some resemblance to any of the
emblems; and the more fertile the fancy is of the person that inspects
the cup, the more he or she will discover in it.

In other respects, every one who takes a pleasure in this amusement,
must be a judge under what circumstances he or she is to make changes
in point of time—speaking, just as it suits, in the present, the past,
or the future; in the same manner, their ingenuity ought to direct them
when to speak more or less pointedly with regard to sex.

THE ROADS, or separate lines, indicate ways; if they are covered with
clouds, and, consequently, in the thick, they are said to be infallible
marks, either of many great or future reverses. But if they appear in
the clear and serene, are the surest token of some fortunate change
near at hand; encompassed with many points or dots, they signify either
a gain of money, or long life.

THE RING signifies marriage; if a letter is near it, it denotes to the
person that has their fortune told, the initial of the name of the
party to be married. If the ring is in the clear, it portends happy and
lucrative friendship; if surrounded with clouds, the contrary. But if
the ring appear at the bottom of the cup, it forebodes the probability
of a separation.

THE LEAF OF CLOVER is, as well here as in common life, a lucky sign.
Its different position in the cup alone makes the difference; because,
if it be on the top, it shows that the good fortune is not far distant;
but it is subject to delay, if it be in the middle or at the bottom.
Should clouds surround it, it shows that many disagreeables will
attend the good fortune; in the clear, it prognosticates serene and
undisturbed happiness.

THE ANCHOR. The emblem of hope and commerce, implies successful
business carried on by water and by land, if on the bottom of the cup;
at the top and in the clear part, it shows constant love and fidelity;
but in thick and cloudy parts, it denotes inconstancy.

THE SERPENT, always the emblem of falsehood and enmity, is likewise
here a general sign of an enemy. On the top or in the middle of the
cup, it promises to the consulting party that by his always acting
properly, his enemies will not be able to triumph over him; if in
the thick or cloudy part, he must watch his temper and actions very
carefully, to prevent great troubles.

THE COFFIN. The emblem of death, prognosticates the same thing here, or
at least a long and tedious illness, if it be in the thick or turbid.
In the clear, it denotes long life; if in the thick, at the top of the
cup, it signifies a considerable estate likely to be made by cautious
industry.

THE DOG, being at all times the emblem of fidelity or envy, has also a
two-fold meaning here. At the top, in the clear, it signifies true and
faithful friends: if the image be surrounded with clouds and dashes, it
shows that some whom you take for your friends are not to be depended
on; but if the dog be at the bottom of the cup, take much care not to
excite any person to envy or jealousy, or you will have to dread the
effects of both.

THE LILY. If this emblem be at the top, or in the middle of the cup,
it signifies that the consulting party either has, or will have, a
good spouse; if it be at the bottom, it denotes anger. In the clear,
the lily further betokens a long and happy life; if clouded, or in the
thick, it portends trouble and vexations.

THE CROSS, in general, predicts adversities; if it be at the top, and
in the clear, it indicates that the misfortunes of the party will soon
be at an end, or that he will, by careful conduct, easily get over
them; but if it appear in the middle, or at the bottom of the thick,
the party must expect many severe trials; if it appear with dots,
either in clear or thick, it promises recompense for sorrow.

THE CLOUDS. If they be more bright than dark, you may expect a good
result from your hopes; but if they are black, you may give it up.
Surrounded with dots, they imply success in trade, if you are saving,
and not too venturesome; the brighter they are, the greater will be
your happiness.

THE SUN, is an emblem of the greatest luck and happiness, if in the
clear; but in the thick, it denotes a great deal of illness; surrounded
by dots or dashes, it foretells that, without much circumspection, an
alteration will soon take place.

THE MOON. If it appear in the clear, it denotes high honors; in the
dark or thick parts, it implies disappointment and sadness, which will,
however, pass without great prejudice. But if it be at the bottom of
the cup, the consulting party may expect, by industry and prudent
conduct, to be very fortunate.

THE STAR denotes happiness, if in the clear, and at the top of the cup;
if clouded, or in the thick, it signifies long life, though exposed
to various troubles. If dots are about it, it foretells fortune and
respectability. Several dots denote good children; surrounded by dots,
it predicts that, without good bringing up, they may cause you grief
and vexation.

MOUNTAINS. If it present only one mountain, it indicates the favor
of people of rank; but several of them, especially in the thick, are
signs of powerful enemies; in the clear, they signify the contrary, or
friends in high life.

THE LETTER. Signifies both pleasant and unpleasant news. If this emblem
is in the clear part, it denotes the speedy arrival of welcome news;
surrounded with dots, it announces the arrival of a remittance of
money; but hemmed in by clouds, it forebodes some melancholy or bad
tidings, a loss, or some other accident; if it be in the clear, and
accompanied by a heart, lovers may expect a favorable letter; but in
the thick it denotes the contrary.

THE TREE. One tree only is indicative of good health; a group of trees
in the clear part, betokens misfortunes, but which may be avoided by
carefulness and industrious habits; several trees, wide apart, promise
that your wishes will be accomplished; if they be encompassed by
dashes, it is a token that your fortune is in its blossom, and requires
only your own care and prudence to bring it to maturity; if the trees
be accompanied by dots, it is a sign of riches.

THE CHILD. In the clear part it bespeaks innocent intercourse between
the consulter and another person; in the thick part it signifies
crosses in love matters, and requires your utmost care to prevent great
expenses; and a family without means of support.

THE WOMAN. Signifies much joy in general. If in the clear, this emblem
shows very great happiness; but in the thick part it cautions against
jealousy. If dots surround the image, it shows children and wealth.

THE PEDESTRIAN. Denotes in general a merchant, good business, pleasant
news, or the recovery of lost things. It denotes to the female a kind
and industrious husband; it also signifies some engagement, and a short
journey.

THE RIDER OR HORSEMAN. Denotes a letter, good news from abroad, a good
situation, or the like; it also foretells that a fortune is to be
obtained by care and industry.

THE MOUSE. As this animal lives by stealth, it also is an emblem of
theft or robbery; if it be in the clear, it shows that your loss will
be easily prevented; but if in the thick, you must use your utmost
watchfulness.

THE ROSE, OR ANY OTHER FLOWER. Usually indicates success in science or
art by study; if married, good children may be expected, and all the
happy fruits, if they have but a good education and good examples.

THE HEART. If it be in the clear, it signifies future pleasure. It
promises joy at receiving some money, if surrounded with dots. If a
ring or two hearts be together, it signifies that the party may expect
to be married; if a letter is perceptible near it, it shews the initial
of the person’s name.

THE GARDEN, WOOD, OR BUSH. Signifies a large company. In the clear
and with leaves, it indicates good friends; in the thick, encompassed
with streaks, or if without leaves, it is a token of the caprices of
fortune, and warns the consulting party to be cautious whom they take
for their friends.

THE ROD. Predicts differences with people about matters relating to
legacies; in the thick, it denotes some affliction, which will require
your utmost care to avert.

THE BIRD IN GENERAL. In the clear, it signifies that the disagreeables
and troubles with which you will have to combat, will only be
surmounted by persevering in doing good; in the thick, it is a sign
of good living; also a speedy journey, or voyage, which, if there be
dashes, is likely to be to a distance.

FISH IN GENERAL. Imply some lucky event by water, if in the clear,
which will either happen to the consulter, or be the means of improving
his affairs. If they are in the thick, the consulter may expect to fish
in troubled water. Surrounded with dots, his destiny warns him to use
diligence, temperance and frugality.

THE LION, OR ANY FEROCIOUS BEAST. At the top, in the clear, it
signifies prosperity in your intercourse with people of quality. At the
bottom it warns the consulter to shun such intercourse and do nothing
to excite any person to envy his fortune.

WORMS. At the top, or in the middle of the cup, they denote good luck
in trade and in matrimony; below they warn you against rivals in
courtship, and against enviers in your trade and profession.

THE STYLE. If combined with an hour-glass and in the thick, it denotes
imminent dangers of all kinds; in love, disappointment; but in the
clear, it signifies that your sweetheart is faithful and affectionate
toward you, and that you are likely to live a long and happy life.




                  CHARMS AND MAGIC PROGNOSTICATIONS.


Herewith I give a few mysterious magic formulas and prognostications,
for the most part hitherto known only to wise old men and women, some
of which I have had confided to me by learned astrologers, and a few
were revealed to me by Madame Le Normand, a celebrated fortune-teller,
in whose predictions the Emperor Napoleon put great confidence.


                       TO PREPARE A LOVE POTION.

The following substances must be gathered in silence when the full moon
is in the heavens: Three white rose leaves, three red rose leaves,
three forget-me-nots, and five blossoms of Veronica.

All these things you must place in a vessel, then pour upon them five
hundred and ninety-five drops of clear Easter water, and place the
vessel over the fire, or what is better still, over a spirit-lamp. This
mixture must be allowed to boil for exactly the sixteenth part of an
hour.

When it has boiled for the requisite length of time, remove it from the
fire, and pour it into a flask. Cork it tightly, and seal it, and it
will keep for years without losing its virtue.

That this potion is certain in its effect I myself will guarantee,
for I have gained more than thirty hearts by its help. Three drops
swallowed by the person whose love you desire, will suffice.


                     ANOTHER MEANS TO COMPEL LOVE.

Take a healthy, well-grown frog. Place it in a box which has been
pierced all over with holes with a stout darning needle or gimlet. Then
carry it in the evening twilight to a large ant-heap, place it in the
midst of the heap, taking care to observe perfect silence.

After the lapse of a week, repair to the ant-heap, take out the box,
and open it, when in place of the frog you will find nothing but a
skeleton. Take this apart very carefully, and you will soon find among
the delicate bones a scale shaped like that of a fish and a hook. You
will need them both. The hook you must contrive to fasten in some way
or other into the clothes of the person whose affections you wish to
obtain, and if he or she has worn it, if it is only for a quarter of a
minute, he will be constrained to love you, and will continue to do so
until you give him or her a fillip with the scale.

This method is over three thousand years old, and it has been practised
by thirty-thousand of our ancestors with the most complete success.


            FOR A GIRL TO ASCERTAIN IF SHE WILL EVER MARRY.

Borrow a wedding-ring from a young married woman—the more recently she
has been married the better—and do not tell her, or let her suspect
your purpose; wear this ring on the third finger of your left hand at
least three hours after sunset before you retire to rest. When you are
ready to go to bed, take half a sheet of pure white paper, with no rule
marks or anything upon it, lay down the ring on the paper, and mark
round it so as to make a circle exactly its size: you then write within
the circle,  “With this ring I hope to wed:” write your name over the
top, and your age underneath; fold the paper with a three-cornered
love-letter fold, and put it under your pillow. Before getting into
bed, suspend the ring by a hair of your head over the pillow so that it
will hang about six inches above your face. You will then dream of your
future husband if you are ever to marry. If you dream of several men,
the one whose appearance pleases you best will be the man. If you dream
of women or girls exclusively, you will never marry. Sometimes it may
happen that your dream is confused, and you have no clear recollection
of it, or perhaps you may not dream at all, in which case you must
continue the charm, by keeping the paper under your pillow for three
nights; but the ring is not necessary after the first night.


                            THE STRAW SIGN.

If you find a blade of straw lying in your chamber, you may expect
a visitor that same day. If there is one grain upon the straw, the
visitor will be a gentleman, if not, a lady.


                   THE SCISSOR OR KNIFE PROGNOSTIC.

If a pair of scissors, a knife, or any other pointed instrument falls
accidentally from your hand, and sticks in the floor, so that it
remains upright, you may make every preparation for company, for be
assured they will not fail to come.


                           THE CAT PORTENT.

When the cat licks and trims herself, it is a sign of visitors, but
this is probably known to most of my readers already.


                           SIGN OF VISITORS.

Finally, a fourth sign of approaching visitors is the crying of the
magpie. Magpies, as is well known, are the most inquisitive creatures
upon the face of the earth. They fly from place to place, and listen
to everything. When they find out that any persons have concluded to
pay you a visit, they fly to you at full speed, and bring you the
news, for they are as chattering as they are inquisitive. They perch
themselves upon your house, or upon a tree which may stand near it, or
on the grass, and there sit and chatter until they think you must have
understood them. Therefore, always give heed to these wise birds, for
it is well to know when you are to expect visitors.


                             THE NEW MOON.

On first seeing the new moon, if you happen to look at it over your
right shoulder, you may make a silent wish, and you will realize it.
If a girl thus observes the new moon, and desires to see her future
husband, she must repeat to herself (so as not to be heard by any one)
the following lines:

  New moon, new—pray let me see
  Who my husband is to be:
        The color of his hair,
        The clothes he is to wear,
  And the happy day that he’ll wed me!

If she is to be married that year, she will positively see the man of
her choice before the wane of the full moon.


                        THE KEY AND BOOK CHARM.

To find out the two first letters of a future wife’s or husband’s name,
take a small Bible and the key of your front street-door, and having
opened to Solomon’s Songs, chap. viii., ver. 6 and 7, place the wards
of the key on those two verses, and let the bow of the key be about
an inch out of the top of the Bible; then shut the book, and tie it
round with your garter, so as the key will not move, and the person
who wishes to know his or her future husband or wife’s signature, must
suspend the Bible, by putting the fore-finger of the right hand under
the bow of the key, and the other person in like manner on the other
side of the bow of the key, who must repeat the following verses,
after the other person’s saying the alphabet, one letter to each time
repeating them.

[Illustration: the key and book charm.]

It must be observed, that you mention to the person who repeats the
verses, before you begin, which you intend to try first, whether
surname or Christian name, and take care to hold the Bible steady; and
when you arrive at the appointed letter, the book will turn round under
your finger, and that you will find to be the first letter of your
intended’s name.

              Solomon’s Songs, chap. viii., ver. 6 and 7.

 "Set me a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm; for love is
 strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are
 coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.

  “Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it; if
 a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would be
 utterly contemned.”


                              CARD CHARM.

Draw all the face cards from the pack and put them into your stocking
on a Friday night, placing the stocking under your pillow. You must
find out by the Almanac the precise time the sun rises on Saturday
morning, and at that moment draw a card. A king denotes a speedy
marriage; a queen means delay or celibacy; a Jack is a gay seducer who
will give you trouble. Diamonds are riches, hearts true love, spades
thrift, and clubs poverty.


                           THE SPIDER OMEN.

It is considered an ill omen when one sees a spider _in the morning_.
The earlier in the morning, and the larger the spider, the greater the
evil which threatens you. It is _within doors_, however, and chiefly
_in one’s own chamber_, that the spider has this signification—out of
doors they forebode no harm. The _wood spider_ especially, is not much
to be dreaded; what I have said above refers particularly to the _house
spider_. Never, on any account, kill a wood spider. By such an act you
would only draw upon yourself the hatred of the whole race of witches,
and sooner or later you would suffer from it.

When found _in the evening_, a spider signifies good luck. The smaller
the spider, the greater the good fortune. I will here teach you the
following rhyme:

     “Matin, chagrin,
    Soir, espoir.”

Little spiders have much less evil in them than the others, and those
called daddy-long-legs are always messengers of good luck.


                           THE STRING TOKEN.

If your shoe-tie or apron string breaks, your sweetheart is thinking of
you.


                   SIGN WHEN YOUR RIGHT EAR TINGLES.

If your _right ear_ tingles, some one is speaking _well_ of you, if
the _left ear_ tingles, some one is speaking _ill_ of you. To find
out who this some one is, you must call out aloud the names of your
acquaintance, one after another. The name at which the tingling ceases
is the name of the person.


                      SIGN WHEN TOUR NOSE ITCHES.

If your nose itches early in the morning, you will on that very day
hear a piece of news.


                             STRANGE BED.

Lay under your pillow a prayer-book, opened at the matrimonial service,
bound round with the garters you wore that day, and a sprig of myrtle
on the page that says  “_With this ring I thee wed_,” and your dream
will be ominous, and you will have your fortune as well told as if you
had paid a dollar to an astrologer.


                         THE SIGN OF A SNEEZE.

If any one tells you anything, and you are shortly after obliged to
sneeze, you may be sure that what was told you is true.


                            THE DEATH-TICK.

If you hear a wood-tick or death-watch ticking anywhere in the house,
you must try to get rid of it as soon as possible, or you will speedily
hear of a death which will greatly afflict you.


                             THE CRICKET.

If there is a cricket in the house, be careful on no account to disturb
it. Think of Dickens’ _Cricket on the Hearth_.


                          AN OMEN OF RICHES.

When an _ant-heap_ gathers in your house, it signifies _coming
wealth_—you may, however, destroy the nest.


                         THE FROG PROGNOSTIC.

If the first _frog_ that you see in the spring of the year is sitting
upon _dry ground_, it signifies that, during the same year, you will
shed as many tears as the frog would require to swim away in.


                           THE CANDLE TOKEN.

When a large red token forms in the flame of a candle-wick, it
signifies that the one who first sees it will soon receive a letter.


                           THE STAR AUGURY.

When you are out of doors on a starlit evening, and shooting stars
appear, turn your face upward to the stars, and utter in a whisper the
wish nearest your heart. If a star shoots while you do this, you may be
sure that the wish will be fulfilled.


                HOW TO BE SURE OF A PARTNER AT A DANCE.

When you wish to be sure of many partners at a dance or ball, let
a little brother or sister, or any other person _hold a thumb for
you_—that is, keep her hand closed like a fist for a quarter of an
hour, holding her _thumb_ between the _fore_ and _middle finger_, while
she thinks of you, and wishes you good luck. This proceeding has a
wonderful effect.


                           THE BRIDE’S OMEN.

If you would have fair weather on your wedding day, you must always
faithfully feed the cats. It is true it is a common error when persons
think that it forebodes evil when it rains upon the bride _in her
bridal dress_. This is no evil omen, but the contrary. But, above all
things, let her be careful not to allow her _shoes to get wet_. If my
young readers would take the trouble to read Frederika Bremer’s work
called  “The House,” they would find in it a confirmation of this
warning.


        TO KNOW IF A WOMAN WITH CHILD WILL HAVE A GIRL OR BOY.

Write the proper names of the father and the mother, and of the month
she conceived with child, and likewise adding all the numbers of those
letters together, divide them by seven; and then, if the remainder be
even, it will be a girl, if uneven, it will be a boy.


                            THE CROW SIGN.

If you wish to know how matters will go with you during the year, you
must take good heed of the first _crow_ that you see in the spring. If,
when you first see it, it is _flying_, it signifies that you will take
a journey that will be longer or shorter, according to the distance
which the bird flies before it alights. It may also signify a complete
_change of abode_, perhaps by a wedding. If you first see the bird
_sitting_, you will remain at home; if _cawing_, much that you do not
think of will happen to you; if upon _one leg_, fortune will not smile
upon you.


                          THE RABBIT AUGURY.

If, when in the open field, or upon the highroad, a _rabbit runs across
your path_, it signifies that something _unpleasant_ will happen to you.


                      THE SHEEP AND SWINE TOKEN.

If you are going to pay a visit, and you meet with _sheep_, you will be
very _welcome_; but if you meet with _swine_, you will be _unwelcome_.


                      A CHARM AGAINST NIGHTMARE.

If you wish to be secure against the nightmare in your sleep, place
your shoes side by side upon the floor, at the foot of the bed, so
that the toes will point _not_ toward the bed, but in the contrary
direction, as if they were _going from it_.


                     WHAT A SPIDER WEB FORETELLS.

If you are walking with a young man at a time when the so-called
gossamer, those snow-white spider’s threads, are floating about in the
air, and one of these delicate fibrous veils sweeps by, _and forms
a band between you and him_, it is a sign that feelings of a tender
nature will some day bind you to each other.


                       HOW TO GET A SWEETHEART.

If a thick, long spider’s web hangs anywhere from the ceiling, you must
sweep it down as soon as possible, for it signifies a _suitor_, and the
one that gets the web will have him.


                 WHAT A PRICK IN THE FINGER SIGNIFIES.

If you are sewing upon a new dress, apron, &c., &c., and you prick your
finger with the needle so as to bring blood, it is a sign that when you
first wear the garment you will receive many kisses.


                             EASTER WATER.

In speaking of a love potion, I made mention of _Easter water_; many
of my readers have, I suppose, never heard of this singular kind of
water. I will explain it to you. It is water which is drawn from the
river upon Easter morning, before the sun has shone upon it. To obtain
it, therefore, you must rise on Easter morning while it is still
quite dark, take your way to the river in silence, fill your pitcher
in silence, and then make your way home in silence, without looking
behind you. You may then go to bed again and have your sleep out. This
Easter water has this peculiarity: _it will keep sweet throughout
the whole year_. You can, therefore, fill as many bottles with it as
you please, cork them tightly, and lay them away. Besides its use in
the above-named love potion, it is beneficial in various maladies,
especially in diseases of the eye, and, in addition to this, it is an
approved cosmetic.


                            THE RYE CHARM.

If you would have bread and cake in plenty during the whole year, hang
a full sheaf of rye and a full sheaf of wheat upon a pole outside the
door, on Christmas morning, so that the birds may come and feed from it.


       NUMEROUS METHODS OF TELLING FORTUNES ON NEW YEAR’S EYE.

The evening which of all others is the most adapted for witchery, is
New Year’s eve. It is a very ill practice to spend this evening _at
a ball_, and it is an acknowledged fact that ill luck, more or less,
follows a person throughout the year, who has _danced the old year out
and the new year in_.

You should spend New Year’s eve with a small circle of near and dear
friends, around a punch-bowl, while you seek to inquire what the future
has in store for you. In the first place this may be done with _melted
lead or wax_. Some of you, perhaps, are acquainted with this method of
inquiring of the future, yet there may be many among your number who
are still ignorant of it. Now, as it is of the highest interest in the
world that these should know the process, I will here give, for their
benefit, a short explanation of it, which the others may skip over.


                        THE LEAD AND WAX SPELL.

Take a good-sized piece of lead or wax, (the former is better,) place
it in a melting-ladle, and dissolve it over the coals, or over a
spirit-lamp, into which you have poured a little alcohol. You must then
take a vessel full of water, (a bowl is best, that is not too deep nor
too shallow,) and pour into it the lead or wax, and from the various
figures which it forms in the water you endeavor to tell your fortune.


                           THE SAUCER CHARM.

The following is another method: you take four saucers; in one you
put a _ring_, in another a _sprig of myrtle_, in the third a _piece
of money_, and in the fourth _nothing_. The individuals composing
the company must now walk around the table, blindfold, one after the
other, and choose one of the saucers, which, in the mean time, have
been changed as to place. Those among the company who choose the ring,
will be _betrothed_ in the course of the year; _myrtle_ signifies
wedlock, the _piece of money wealth_, the _empty saucer_ no change of
circumstances.


  HOW TO TELL THE FIRST LETTER OF YOUR FUTURE WIFE OR HUSBAND’S NAME.

If you wish to know the letter with which your future wife or husband’s
name commences, write all the letters of the alphabet, separately, upon
small pieces of paper, put these pieces in a box, and draw one out
blindfold.

All this may be done before twelve o’clock. Exactly at the stroke of
midnight, however, you can summon up your future husband or wife, and
behold his or her image _up the chimney_.


                           THE CANDLE SPELL.

The following is another method: Take _two candles_, go a little
before twelve o’clock into an adjoining chamber—no one on any account
must follow you—place yourself before the _mirror_, and exactly as it
strikes _twelve_, call out your own name in full, _three times_. When
the last sound has died away, you will see in the glass your future
husband looking over your shoulder.

The company may not remain together after twelve o’clock. When the old
year is out and the new year in, you must embrace, and kiss each other,
and then go home. You must not yet go to bed, however, but must first
devote an hour to solitude, to reflect upon all which the past year has
brought with it, and to commit to writing the chief occurrences, as
well as the state of your minds. It would be well to keep a book for
this purpose, in which you should read and write only on a new-year’s
eve, and at other times keep carefully stored away. I have always done
this, and I can assure you, that it is with a feeling of sad, sweet
interest, that I now read, each new-year’s eve, of the eighty-nine
years of my life.


                        THE NUTSHELL WITCHERY.

Among the witcheries which you may perform on a new-year’s eve, there
is one to which I have not alluded. Each person of the company, to wit,
takes a _nutshell_, and, after lighting a _wax taper_, places it in the
shell. A basin of water is then brought. You now place the nutshells,
with the burning tapers in them, in the basin. Some will incline toward
each other as they float along, others will repel each other, until, at
last, all are extinguished or sunk. What conclusions in reference to
the future, are to be drawn from the various movements of these tiny
magic skiffs, your own quick wits will tell you.


                           THE BRIDGE OMEN.

After you have gone home, and have devoted an hour to the solitary task
which I counselled you (see CANDLE SPELL), take a _glass of water_,
cut a small _chip of wood_, and lay it crosswise upon the glass, so
that it stretches like a bridge, from one end to the opposite one. Then
place this glass under your bed. The consequence will be that you will
dream during the night that you are walking over a bridge, and that you
fall into the water. A gentleman, however, appears and rescues you.
This same gentleman, whom you will see very distinctly, be careful to
remember, for he is your future husband. A gentleman can make the same
experiment, and he will dream the same thing, with the difference only,
that it is a lady who rescues him, and she is to be his future wife.


                            THE HAIR SPELL.

If you wish any person to think of you, pluck a hair from your head,
and blow it out into the air toward that quarter of the heavens in
which the person lives, while, at the same time, you call out the name
of this person _three times_, at the top of your voice. During this you
must be entirely alone, and must have thought intently upon the person
for, at least, a quarter of an hour beforehand. At the same instant he
will experience a strange unearthly shudder or thrill, and his thoughts
will turn irresistibly toward you.


                     SIGN WHEN YOU WET YOUR APRON.

When you are washing, if you are apt _to wet your apron_ a great deal,
it is a sign that your future husband will be a tippler. Take good heed
therefore!


                            THE NAIL TOKEN.

If a person has nails that are all bitten to pieces, and gnawed close
to the quick, it signifies an evil, malicious character, and you have
every reason in the world to be on your guard in your intercourse with
such a person.




  HOW TO DETERMINE THE LUCKY AND THE UNLUCKY DAYS OF ANY MONTH IN THE
                                 YEAR.


Ascertain from the Almanac the day on which a full moon occurs, and
count the number of days from that to the end of the month: you then
multiply the number of days in the month by the number ascertained as
above, and the total will give you the lucky days (subject to a further
test hereafter explained), which must be reckoned this wise: if the
total happens to be, say 516, the lucky days of that month would be
the 5th and 16th, and if it should be 561, the days are the same, for
you must always transpose the figures, when they will work together.
Suppose that instead of 516, the total should be 399; as neither of
these figures can be paired, the lucky days from that total are the
3d and 9th, and the 9th would be considered doubly lucky, if no tests
worked to the contrary.

The unlucky days are determined in precisely the same manner, by
multiplying the number of days in the month by the number which had
passed previous to a full moon.

After working out your list of lucky days, in the manner above
described, you must then test them, in order to be sure that there are
no opposing influences. You can do this by calculating the unlucky
days. Should you find that any day of the month which was designated as
lucky came also in the list of unlucky days, the latter preponderates,
and you must strike it from the lucky list.

This plan of demonstrating lucky and unlucky days is very ancient,
and has been tested to such an extent that it is considered accurate
by most astrologers. In old times, before the mass of the people
understood much about figures, the professional fortune-tellers
demanded a large fee for casting the lucky days of any month, which
they accomplished in the manner above described.

Lucky marriage days for girls were cast in the same manner, except
that the age of the girl was used as the multiplicator, or multiplier,
instead of the number of days in the month. The result was determined
similarly, and also by a test of the unlucky days. Thus, if a girl
is 18 years old, and thinks of marrying in October, she takes up an
Almanac and ascertains the day of the full moon in that month. It
occurs on the 24th, and there are 31 days in the month: this leaves 7
for the multiplier. She multiplies this by her age, 18, and the result
is 106, which shows the lucky days in that month for her to marry are
the 10th and 6th, unless they are destroyed by the test, which is
determined as follows: There are 23 days before the 24th, and she must
multiply 23 by 18, which gives 414, and shows that the 4th and 14th are
the only unlucky days for her to marry; and as they do not conflict
with the lucky days, the 6th and 10th may be considered as genuine
lucky days for that month, reckoning the moon to have fulled on the
24th. In determining her age, she should reckon any period over half a
year a full year.




                           THE DIVINING ROD:

    OR, HOW TO TELL WHERE TO DIG FOR WATER AND ALL KINDS OF METALS.


So early as Agricola, a celebrated conjuror who lived in ancient times,
the divining rod was in much request, and has obtained great credit
for its discovering where to dig for metals and springs of water; for
some years past its reputation has been upon the decline, but lately it
has been revived, and with great success, as I have myself found from
numerous experiments that its effects are more than imagination, and
to enable others to do the like, I have laid down some short rules, as
follows:

DIRECTIONS FOR CHOOSING RODS. The hazel and willow rods, I have by
experience found, will actually answer with all persons who are in a
good state of health, if they are used with moderation, and at some
distance of time, after meals, when the operator is in good spirits.
The hazel, willow, and elm are all attracted by springs of water. Some
persons have the virtue intermittently; the rod in their hands will
attract one half hour, and repel the next. The rod is attracted by
water, all metals, coals, amber, and lime-stone, but with different
degrees of strength.

The best rods are those from the hazel, or nut-tree, as they are
pliant and rough, and are best cut in the winter months; a shoot that
terminates equally forked is to be preferred, (_See Fig. 1_,) about two
feet and a half long; but as such a fork is rarely to be met with, two
single ones of a length, and size may be tied together with thread, and
they will answer as well as the others. (_See Fig. 2._)

[Illustration:  Fig. 1.       Fig. 2.]

The most convenient and handy method of holding the rod is with the
palms of the hands turned upward, and the two ends of the rod coming
outward; the palms should be held horizontally as nearly as possible;
the part of the rod in the hands ought to be straight, and not bent
either backward or forward; the upper part of the arm should be kept
pretty close to the sides, and the elbows resting on them, the lower
part of the arm making nearly a right angle with the upper, though
rather a little more acute; the rod ought to be so held that, in its
working, the sides may move clear of the little fingers. The position
of the rod, when properly held, is much like the following figure,
(_see Fig. 3_,) where the distance between the four downward lines is
the part supposed to be held in the hand.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

The best manner of carrying the rod is with the end prolaided in an
angle of about eighty degrees from the horizon, as by this method of
carrying, the repulsion is more plainly perceived than if it was held
perpendicularly. But after all the directions that can be given, the
adroit use of it can only be attained by practice. It is necessary that
the grasp should be steady, for if, when the rod is going, there should
be the least succession or counteraction in the hands, though ever
so small, it will greatly impair, and generally totally prevent its
activity, which is not to be done by the mere strength of the grasp,
for provided this be steady, no strength can stop it.

As soon as the person’s foremost foot comes near the attracting body,
the end of the rod is repelled toward the face. (_See Fig. 4._) Then
open the hands a little, replace the rod, and approach nearer, and the
repulsion will be continued until the foot is on or over the attracting
body. When this is the case, the rod will first be repelled a little,
viz., two or three inches, and then be attracted toward it.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

When it hath been drawn down, it must not be thrown back without
opening the hands, a fresh grasp being necessary to every attraction,
but the least opening of the hand is sufficient. As long as the person
stands over the attracting body, the rod continues to be attracted,
but as soon as the fore foot is beyond it, then the rod is drawn down
backward to the face. Metals have different degrees of attraction:
gold is strongest, next copper, then iron, silver, tin, lead, bones,
coals, springs of water and lime-stone. To make common experiments,
set the foot on a piece or coin of any of these metals, having the rod
in your hands as before directed. In using the rod to discover springs
and metals, let the person hold the rod as already directed, and then
advancing north or south with a slow pace, just one foot before the
other, at first the rod may be repelled, but as the person advances
slowly, and comes over the spring, or vein of ore, the rod will be
strongly attracted. The divining rod is sometimes called _Divina
Virgula_, and sometimes _The Luck Rod_.


                 JUDGMENTS DRAWN FROM THE MOON’S AGE.

1. A child born within twenty-one hours after the new moon will be
fortunate and live to a good old age; whatever is dreamt on this day
will be fortunate and pleasant to the dreamer; various undertakings
will succeed on this day.

2. This is a very lucky day for discovering things lost or hidden;
the child born on this day will thrive, but the dreams are not to be
depended upon.

3. A child born on this day will be fortunate through persons in power,
and all dreams will prove true.

4. This day is bad; persons failing on this day rarely recover; the
dreams will have no effect.

5. This day is favorable to begin a good work, and the dreams will
be tolerably successful; the child born on this day will be vain and
deceitful.

6. The dreams of this day will not immediately come to pass; and the
child born will not live long.

7. Do not tell your dreams on this day; if sickness befall you on this
day you will soon recover; the child born will live long, but have many
troubles.

8. Dreams of this day will come to pass; business begun on this day
will prosper, and anything lost will be found.

9. This day differs little from the former, the child born on this day
will acquire great riches and honor.

10. This day is likely to be fatal; those who fall sick will rarely
recover; the child born on this day will be devoted to religion, and of
an engaging form and manner; if a female, she will possess an uncommon
share of wisdom and learning; this day is good to begin a journey, to
marry, or to engage in business.

11. Dreams on this day are fortunate; and the child born will live
long, and be very sensible; but a person who falls sick on this day
rarely recovers.

12. Dreams on this day will quickly prove true.

13. If you ask a favor on this day, it will be granted.

14. The sickness that befalls a person on this day is likely to prove
mortal; what was lost yesterday may be found to-day.

15. The child born on this day will be of ill manners and unfortunate;
it is a good day for dealing in merchandise.

16. The child born on this day will be foolish; it is an unlucky day to
marry, or to begin any kind of business on.

17. The child born on this day will be very valiant, but will suffer
hardships; if a female, she will be chaste and industrious, and live
respected to a great age.

18. This day is dangerous; the child born will be dishonest.

19. Dreams on this day will be vain and untrue; the child born will
grow up healthy and strong, but be of a selfish and ungentle turn of
mind.

20. The child born will be fortunate, and of a cheerful countenance,
religious, and much beloved; any kind of business begun, on this day
will be unfortunate.

21. The child born on this day will be of an ungovernable temper,
forsake his friends, wander in a foreign land, and be unhappy through
life; it is a happy day to marry on; and all business begun on this day
will be successful.

22. The child born on this day will be wicked, meet with many dangers,
and come to an untimely end; it is a very unfortunate day, and
threatens everything with disappointment and crosses: whoever falls
sick on this day seldom recovers.

23. Dreams on this day are certain; and the child born or this day will
be rich and greatly esteemed.

24. This day is favorable for dreams; and the child born will be of a
sweet and amiable disposition.

25. This day is bad for dreams, and those who fall sick on it, are in
great danger; the child born on this day will be its parents’ delight,
but will not live to any great age.

26. This day is good for dreams, but children born on it will
experience many hardships, though in the end, they may turn out happily.

27. This is a very unfortunate day to look for anything that is lost,
but a child born on this day will make a great stir in the world,
either as a statesman, soldier, physician, or clergyman.

28. A child born upon this day will live to be a rich and truly good
man if born before noon, but if born after that hour, it is to be
feared that he will be dissipated or worthless.

29. Dreams on this day are not worth a moment’s attention, for rest
assured they will never be fulfilled. Never buy a lottery ticket on
this day.




           TO KNOW THE TEMPER AND DISPOSITION OF EVERY ONE.


               THE SIGNS OF A CHOLERIC DISPOSITION ARE,

1. The habit of the body hot in touch, dry, lean, hard, and hairy.

2. The color of the face, yellow.

3. A natural dryness of the mouth and tongue.

4. The thirst great, and frequent.

5. Activity and inquietude of the body.

6. The pulse hard, swift, and often beating.

7. The spittle bitter.

8. The dreams are most of yellow things, of brawls, of fights and
quarrels.


               THE SIGNS OF A SANGUINE CONSTITUTION ARE,

1. The habit of the body hot in touch, fleshy, soft and hairy.

2. The color of the body fresh, sanguine and lively.

3. A natural and constant blush in the face.

4. The pulse soft, moist, and full.

5. The spittle sweet.

6. Dreams most commonly of red things, of beauty, feasting, dancing,
music, and all jovial and pleasing recreations.

7. A continual habit of pleasantness and affability.

8. Often affected with jests, mirth, and laughter.


              THE SIGNS OF A PHLEGMATIC CONSTITUTION ARE,

1. The habit of the body, cold and moist; in touch, soft, fat, gross,
and not hairy.

2. A constant natural whiteness, or wanness in the face.

3. The pulse soft, slow, and rare.

4. The thirst little, and seldom desiring drink.

5. The dreams usually are of white things, floods, inundations, and
accidents belonging to water.

6. Sleep, much and frequent.

7. Slowness and dulness of the body to exercise.


              THE SIGNS OF A MELANCHOLY CONSTITUTION ARE,

1. The body in touch, cold, dry, lean, and smooth.

2. The body of a dark, dull, gloomy, leaden color.

3. The spittle in small quantities, and sour.

4. Pulse little, rare and hard.

5. They dream of terrible things, as ghosts, wild beasts, etc.

6. Greatly oppressed with fear.

7. Constancy in the performance of the thing intended.


                  THE SIGNS OF A GENEROUS PERSON ARE,

1. The forehead large, fleshy, plain and smooth.

2. The eye moist and shining.

3. The countenance expressing joy and content.

4. The voice pleasant.

5. The motion of the body, slow, etc.


                  THE SIGNS OF AN ILL-NATURED PERSON.

1. The form of the body meagre and lean.

2. The forehead cloudy, sullen and wrinkled.

3. The eye cast down and malicious.

4. A nimble tongue.

5. Walking a short, quick, uneven pace.

6. A secret murmuring to himself as he walks.




               SIGNIFICATION OR LANGUAGE OF THE FLOWERS.


No Book on Fortune-telling and Dreams would be complete without the
signification of the flowers. If we dream of, or have those smiles of
nature given to us, we should at once consult the language of Flora and
ascertain what our dream or present signifies.

It is no new thing to attach a sentiment or meaning to each flower.
In Eastern lands flowers have a language which all understand. It is
that  “still small voice” which is powerful on account of its silence.
It is one of the chief amusements of the Greek girls to drop these
symbols of their esteem or scorn upon the various passengers who pass
their latticed windows, and the traveller can read upon Egyptian rocks
accounts of the conquests of that ancient people recorded by foreign
plants. Accompanying, we give a complete dictionary of the meaning of
the flowers.

ACACIA BLOSSOM. Come to my heart!

ACONITE—BLUE. Flatterer! are you to be trusted?

ACONITE—YELLOW. Your caprice is unendurable.

ALPINE ROSE. Love must venture; timidity can never win.

AMARANTH. The earthly only can become the spoil of the grave; love is
immortal, and belongs to heaven.

ANEMONE. My thought by day, and my dream by night.

ANEMONE-WOOD. Your cruelty is destroying me.

ANISE. You must mend your manners.

APPLE BLOSSOM. Who plucks the blossoms, destroys his hopes of fruit.

APRICOT BLOSSOM. Are you always so gay, so trifling?

ASTER. Weep no longer—you will find him again above the stars.

ASPEN-LEAF. Your heart beats for every one, therefore no heart beats
for you.

AURICULA. Who would not love you?

BALSAM. Splendor dazzles, grace alone enchains.

BALSAM-ROSE. Let my image dwell always in your heart.

BARLEY. Come again to-morrow.

BEAN BLOSSOM. Forgive me, I misunderstood you.

BIRCH BRANCH. How sweetly are sorrow’s tears dried up on the bosom of a
sympathizing friend.

BLACKBERRY BRANCH. Contentment and love.

BLUE-BOTTLE. Be simple and humble, and life will always appear to you
in heavenly colors.

BOX-WOOD. I hope continually.

BUCKWHEAT BLOSSOM. Not idle show, quiet domestic virtues alone ensure
lasting happiness.

BURR. Like seeks like.

BUTTER-CUP. Your presence is consoling to me.

CABBAGE-LEAF. When you come again, come sober.

CAMOMILE. Could you, then, love anybody beside yourself?

CARNATION. How I burn!

CENTAURY. You seek money only—I will not waste my love upon you.

CHERRY BLOSSOM. When will love tinge your cheeks?

CHESTNUT BLOSSOM. Always as to-day.

CLOVER BLOSSOM. I will live for you.

COLUMBINE. Your words sound well, but what says your heart?

CROWN-IMPERIAL. Let me be your slave, and I am happy.

CUCKOO-FLOWER. I like not long complainings.

CURRANT-TWIG. Whoever loves me must share my sorrow, and respect my
grief.

CYPRESS. When my heart is broken, and I lie in the cold grave give me
at least a tear.

DAFFODIL. Let me not pine!

DILL. Love strengthens—I will protect you.

ELDER BLOSSOM. Your fidelity is destined to a sweet reward.

FIG-LEAF. I am ashamed.

FLAX. Do you love me for myself?

FOX-GLOVE. None but a fool could be as forward as you.

GILLIFLOWER. Where you are, it is always spring.

GRAPE-VINE. Fear not! Love conquers!

GRASS. Love for love, truth for truth.

HAZEL-TWIG. Forgive me!

HEART’S-EASE. Because I feel friendship for you, you imagine that I
love you—you are in error.

HEATHER BLOSSOM. I ask only for your friendship.

HELIOTROPE. Give me proofs of your love.

HONEY-SUCKLE. Eternal fidelity! When shall we meet again?

HYACINTH-SINGLE. When I am dead, you will regret your cruelty.

HYACINTH-DOUBLE. Heaven shines in your eyes; the angels listen to your
words.

HYDRANGEA. And you could so soon forget me!

IMMORTELLE. True love is unchangeable.

IRIS. Why have you disturbed the peace of my heart?

IVY. I am ever true.

JASMINE. Can calm, domestic happiness content you?

LARK-SPUR. Your love is my aim.

LAUREL. You have my heart.

LEMON BLOSSOM. Give me hope!

LILY-TIGER. My heart burns.

LILY-WHITE. Angel, let me adore you.

LINDEN BLOSSOM. I am favorably inclined to you.

MAPLE-TWIG. What is more painful than to be misunderstood by one you
love?

MARIGOLD. I like you not.

MARSH-MALLOW. To fondle is not to love.

MIGNONNETTE. Not beauty, but goodness of heart is my choice.

MULLEN. If you love me, I envy not a king’s crown.

MUSHROOM. Away! go home, and cry about it!

MYRTLE BLOSSOM. Be constant; sweet is the reward of love.

MYRTLE BRANCH. Will you be my wife (husband)?

NETTLE. Beware! coquetry has its penalty.

OAK-LEAF. My fidelity bids defiance to every storm.

OATS. Return.

OLEANDER. True until death.

PARSLEY. You are in love with me.

PEONY. You are too vain—and of what?

PINE. In vain you strive to gain my confidence—stern fate has made me
rude and silent.

PINK-CARTHUSIAN. Why so reserved?

PINK-VARIEGATED. Friendship is all that I can feel for you.

POMEGRANATE BLOSSOM. A kiss.

POPPY. I cannot endure you—you are too stupid.

POTATO BLOSSOM. Modest worth surpasses outward show.

PRIMROSE. Give me your love—I will cherish it faithfully and in secret.

RANUNCULUS. Where you are there is my home.

RIBBON GRASS. Give me a kiss.

ROCKET. Sleep visits not my eyelids; I wake and long for you.

ROSE—MONTHLY. Every month you have a new love.

ROSE—RED. You pass like a conqueror through the world.

ROSE—WHITE. Beautiful are you in childlike innocence, more beautiful
will you be when warmed by the breath of love.

ROSE-BUD. Your presence fills me with heavenly longing.

ROSE-LEAF—RED. Yes!

ROSE-LEAF—WHITE. No!

ROSEMARY. You were absent—life departed; you returned—I live again.

SNOW-DROP. You have kindled the first sparks of love in my bosom.

STRAWBERRY. Not earthly rank gives happiness, but worth and amiability.

SWEET-PEA. Your name is inconstancy.

SWEET-WILLIAM. Light and hasty impressions are soon effaced.

THISTLE. Your words offend me; you have deeply wounded me.

THYME. I have not understood you.

VERONICA. What would this world be without you?

VIOLET. I love you for your gentle modesty.

WINTERGREEN. Remain constant and true—then we will meet again.

WOOD-SORREL. You brighten my existence as the stars brighten the night.




                 THIRTY PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICATIONS.


STRENGTH OF BODY is known by a stiff hair, large bones, firm and robust
limbs, short muscular neck, firm and erect, the head and breast high,
the forehead short, hard, and peaked, with bristly hair, large feet,
rather thick than broad, a harsh unequal voice, and choleric complexion.

WEAKNESS OF BODY is distinguished by a small ill-proportioned head,
narrow shoulders, soft skin, and melancholy complexion.

THE SIGNS OF LONG LIFE are strong teeth, a sanguine temperament, middle
stature, large, deep, and ruddy lines in the hand, large muscles,
stooping shoulders, full chest, firm flesh, clear complexion, slow
growth, wide ears, and large eyelids.

SHORT LIFE may be inferred from a thick tongue; the appearance of
grinders before the age of puberty, thin, straggling and uneven teeth,
confused lines in the hand, of a quick but small growth.

A GOOD GENIUS may be expected from a thin skin, middle stature, blue
bright eyes, fair complexion, straight, pretty strong hair, an affable
aspect, the eyebrows joined, moderation in mirth, an open, cheerful
countenance, and the temples a little concave.

A DUNCE may be known by a swollen neck, plump arms, sides, and loins,
a round head, concave behind, a large fleshy forehead, pale eyes, a
dull heavy look, small joints, snuffing nostrils, and a proneness to
laughter, little hands, an ill-proportioned head, either too big or too
little, blubber lips, short fingers, and thick legs.

FORTITUDE is promised from a wide mouth, a sonorous voice, grave,
slow, and always equal, upright posture, large eyes, pretty open and
steadfast, the hair high above the forehead, the head much compressed
or flattened, the forehead square and high, the extremities large and
robust, the neck firm though not fleshy, a large corpulent chest, and
brown complexion.

BOLDNESS is characterized by a prominent mouth, rugged appearance,
rough forehead, arched eyebrows, large nostrils and teeth, short neck,
great arms, ample chest, square shoulders and a forward countenance.

PRUDENCE is generally distinguished by a head which is flat on the
sides, a broad square forehead, a little concave in the middle, a soft
voice, a large chest, a thin hair, light eyes, either blue, brown or
black, large eyes, and an aquiline nose.

A GOOD MEMORY is commonly attached to those persons who are smaller,
yet better formed in the upper than the lower parts, not fat but
fleshy, of a fair, delicate skin, with the poll of the head uncovered,
crooked nose, teeth thick set, large ears with plenty of cartilage.

A BAD MEMORY is observable in persons who are larger in their superior
than inferior parts, fleshy, though dry and bald.—N. B. This is
expressly contrary to the opinion of Aristotle, who says that the
superior parts being larger than the inferior signify a good memory,
and _vice versa_.

A GOOD IMAGINATION AND THOUGHTFUL DISPOSITION is distinguished by a
large prominent forehead, a fixed and attentive look, slow respiration,
and an inclination of the head.

A GOOD SIGHT is enjoyed by those persons who have generally black,
thick, straight eye-lashes, large bushy eyebrows, concave eyes,
contracted as it were inwards.

SHORT-SIGHTED PEOPLE have a stern, earnest look, small, short eyebrows,
large pupils and prominent eyes.

SENSE OF HEARING: those who possess the same in perfection, have ears
well furnished with gristle, well channelled and hairy.

THE SENSE OF SMELLING is most perfect in those who have large noses,
descending very near the mouth, neither too moist nor too dry.

A NICE FACULTY OF TASTING is peculiar to such as have a spongy, porous,
soft tongue, well moistened with saliva, yet not too moist.

DELICACY IN THE TOUCH belongs to those who have a soft skin, sensible
nerves, and nervous sinews, moderately warm and dry.

IRASCIBILITY is accompanied by an erect posture, a clear skin, a solemn
voice, open nostrils, moist temples, displaying superficial veins,
thick neck, equal use of both hands, quick pace, blood-shot eyes,
large, unequal, ill-ranged eyes, and choleric disposition.

TIMOROUSNESS resides where we find a concave neck, pale color,
weak-winking eyes, soft hair, smooth plump breast, shrill tremulous
voice, small mouth, thin lips, broad thin hands, and small shambling
feet.

MELANCHOLY is denoted by a wrinkled countenance, dejected eyes, meeting
eyebrows, slow pace, fixed look, and deliberate respiration.

AN AMOROUS DISPOSITION may be known by a fair, slender face, a
redundancy of hair, rough temples, broad forehead, moist shining eyes,
wide nostrils, narrow shoulders, hairy hands and arms, well-shaped legs.

GAYETY attends a serene open forehead, rosy agreeable countenance, a
sweet musical tone of voice, an agile body and soft flesh.

ENVY appears with a wrinkled forehead, frowning, dejected, and
squinting look, a pale, melancholy countenance, and a dry, rough skin.

INTREPIDITY often resides in a small body, with red curled hair, ruddy
countenance, frowning eyebrows, arched and meeting, eyes blue and
yellowish, large mouth, and red lines in the hand.

GENTLENESS AND COMPLACENCY may be distinguished by a soft and moist
palm, frequency of shutting the eyes, soft movement, slow speech, soft,
straight and lightish-colored hair.

BASHFULNESS may be discovered by moist eyes, never wide open, eyebrows
frequently lowered, blushing cheeks, moderate pace, slow and submissive
speech, bent body, and glowing ears of a purple hue.

TEMPERANCE OR SOBRIETY is accompanied with an equal respiration, a
moderate-sized mouth, smooth temples, eyes of an ordinary size, either
fair or azure, and a short, flat body.

STRENGTH OF MIND is signified by light, curled hair, a small body,
shining eyes, but a little depressed, a grave intense voice, bushy
beard, large broad back and shoulders.

PRIDE stands confessed with arched eyebrows, a large prominent mouth, a
broad chest, slow pace, erected head, shrugging shoulders, and staring
eyes.

LUXURY dwells with a ruddy or pale complexion, downy temples, bald
pate, little eyes, thick neck, corpulent body, large nose, thin
eyebrows, and hands covered with a kind of down.

LOQUACITY may be expected from a bushy beard, broad fingers, pointed
tongue, eyes of a ruddy hue, a large prominent upper lip, and a sharp
pointed nose.

PERVERSENESS may be dreaded, when we perceive a high forehead, firm,
short, thick, immovable neck, quick speech, immoderate laughter, fiery
eyes, and short fleshy hands and fingers.




                          DICK & FITZGERALD,

                         PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK.

⁂ The Publishers, upon receipt of the price, will send any of
the following books by mail, POSTAGE FREE, to any part of the United
States. In ordering books, the full name, post-office, county and State
should be plainly written.


 Inquire Within for Anything You Want to Know; or, Over 3,500 Facts
 for the People.  “Inquire Within” is one of the most valuable and
 extraordinary volumes ever presented to the American public, and
 embodies nearly 4,000 facts, in most of which any person living will
 find instruction, aid and entertainment. As a book to be kept in the
 family for reference it is unequaled, comprising, as it does, all
 kinds of books of information in a single volume.

  _It is a Doctor, a Gardener, a Schoolmaster,_
  _A Dancing-Master, an Artist, a Naturalist,_
  _A Modeler, a Cook, a Lawyer,_
  _A Surgeon, a Chemist, a Perfumer,_
  _A Dyer, a Brewer, an Architect,_
  _A Bookkeeper, a Confectioner, a Laundress,_
  _A  “Hoyle,” a  “Letter-Writer,”_
  _A  “Ready Reckoner,” and a Housekeeper._

  IT ALSO CONTAINS

  _Tables of Weights and Measures,_
  _Interest Tables from $1 up to $10,000,_
  _Innumerable Tables on Curious and Interesting Subjects,_
  _All Kinds of Family Amusements and Recreations._

 It might strike the casual observer as something incredible, if not
 impossible, that such an immense and varied amount of matter could
 be crowded into a book of the merely nominal price of a dollar and a
 half; but the work contains 436 large pages of small type, closely
 printed in double column, and a perusal of it will convince the
 most skeptical that the only thing to be wondered at in it, is the
 extremely low price at which it is offered.

  Bound in extra cloth, with gilt side and back.       $1.50


 The Perfect Gentleman. A book of Etiquette and Eloquence. Containing
 information and instruction for those who desire to become brilliant
 or conspicuous in General Society, or at Parties, Dinners or Popular
 Gatherings, etc. It gives directions how to use wine at table, with
 Rules for judging the quality thereof, Rules for Carving, and a
 complete Etiquette of the Dinner Table, including Dinner Speeches,
 Toasts and Sentiments, Wit and Conversation at Table, etc. It has
 also an American Code of Etiquette and Politeness for all occasions.
 It also contains all the necessary information relating to the Rules
 of Etiquette to be observed in fashionable and official society at
 Washington, and this alone makes it valuable to any one who visits
 that city, either for pleasure or business. It also contains, Model
 Speeches, with directions how to deliver them, Duties of the Chairman
 at Public Meetings, Forms of Preambles and Resolutions, etc. It is a
 handsomely bound volume of 335 pages.

  $1.50


 McBride’s New Dialogues. Especially designed for School and Literary
 Amateur Entertainments; containing entirely New and Original
 Dialogues, introducing Irish, Yankee, and other eccentric characters.
 By H. ELLIOTT MCBRIDE.

CONTENTS.

  _A Happy Woman._
  _The Somnambulist._
  _Those Thompsons._
  _Playing School._
  _Tom and Sally._
  _Assisting Hezekiah._
  _A Visit to the Oil Regions._
  _Breaking up the Exhibition._
  _Turning Around._
  _A Little Boy’s Debate._
  _The Silver Lining._
  _Restraining Jotham._
  _A Shoemaker’s Troubles._
  _An Uncomfortable Predicament._
  _The Opening Speech._
  _The Cucumber Hill Debating Club._
  _Married by the New Justice._
  _Bread on the Waters._
  _An Unsuccessful Advance._
  _When Women Have Their Rights._
  _Only Another Footprint._
  _Rosabella’s Lovers._
  _A Smart Boy._
  _A Heavy Shower._
  _Master of the Situation._

 The marked favor with which the four preceding volumes have been
 received suggested the necessity for an increased variety of new
 eccentric and characteristic pieces, to form an addition to the
 repertoire contained in  “McBride’s Comic Dialogues,”  “McBride’s All
 Kinds of Dialogues,”  “McBride’s Humorous Dialogues,” and  “McBride’s
 Temperance Dialogues.” They are all written with a view to develop
 dramatic talent, and abound in quaint humor, Dialect Drolleries, and
 telling stage  “situations.”

  16mo, 178 pages, illuminated paper cover.       30 cts.
  Bound in boards.                                50 cts.


 Dick’s Book of Toasts, Speeches and Responses. Containing Toasts and
 Sentiments for Public and Social Occasions, and specimen Speeches with
 appropriate replies suitable for the following occasions:

  _Public Dinners_,
  _Social Dinners_,
  _Convivial Gatherings_,
  _Art and Professional Banquets_,
  _Manufacturers’ Meetings_,
  _Agricultural and Commercial Festivals_,
  _Special Toasts for Ladies_,
  _Christmas, Thanksgiving and other Festivals_,
  _Friendly Meetings_,
  _Weddings and their Anniversaries_,
  _Army and Navy Banquets_,
  _Patriotic and Political Occasions_,
  _Trades’ Unions and Dinners_,
  _Benedicts’ and Bachelors’ Banquets_,
  _Masonic Celebrations_,
  _Sporting Coteries_,
  _All Kinds of Occasions_.

 This work includes an instructive dissertation on the Art of making
 amusing After-dinner Speeches, giving hints and directions by the
 aid of which persons with only ordinary intelligence can make an
 entertaining and telling speech. Also, Correct Rules and Advice for
 Presiding at Table.

 The use of this work will render a poor and diffident speaker fluent
 and witty—and a good speaker better and wittier, besides affording
 an immense fund of anecdotes, wit and wisdom, and other serviceable
 matter to draw upon at will. Paper covers. Price. 30 cts.


 How Boggins Was Cured. An intensely ludicrous sketch, pictorially
 expressed; showing how Mr. Boggins, who had been reduced to a
 despairingly crippled state by rheumatism and a complication of
 other causes, was induced to submit to the wonderful effects of a
 course of dynamo-electro magnetic therapeutics, tracing the magical
 and potent effects of the treatment, and the heroic efforts he made
 while submitting to the doctor’s system of pathology; until, crowned
 with complete success, he is able to throw aside his crutches and is
 restored to perfect health and pristine agility. An entirely new and
 original series of sketches. Funny! is no name for it. Small quarto.
 Illustrated. 10 cts.


 Le Marchand’s Fortune-Teller and Dreamer’s Dictionary. Containing a
 complete Dictionary of Dreams, alphabetically arranged, with a clear
 interpretation of each Dream. Also showing how to tell fortunes by the
 Lady’s Love Oracle. How to foretell the Sex of Children. How to tell
 any Person’s Age. To know who your future Husband will be, and how
 soon you will be Married. How to tell Future events with Cards, Dice,
 Tea and Coffee Grounds, Eggs, Apple Parings and the Lines of the Hand.
 Illustrated with wood engravings. 144 pages. Bound in boards. 40 cts.


 Fontaine’s Golden Wheel Dream-Book and Fortune-Teller. Being the most
 complete book on Fortune Telling and Interpreting Dreams ever printed.
 This book informs you how to TELL FORTUNES with the _Golden Wheel,
 Cards, Dice and Dominoes_; how to find whereto dig for water, with the
 celebrated DIVINING ROD; together with Twenty Ways of Telling Fortunes
 on New Year’s Eve. It is illustrated with engravings, and contains
 a large Colored Lithographic Engraving of the _Golden Wheel_, which
 folds up. 144 pages, bound in boards. 40 cts.


 Pettengill’s Perfect Fortune-Teller and Dream-Book; or, The Art of
 Discerning Future Events. This is a most complete Fortune-Teller
 and Dream-Book. It is compiled with great care from authorities on
 Astrology, Geology, Chiromancy, Necromancy, Spiritual Philosophy,
 etc., etc. Among the subjects treated of, are—Casting Nativities
 by the Stars, Telling Fortunes by Lines on the Hand, by Moles on
 the Body, by Turning Cards, by Questions of Destiny, by Physical
 Appearances, by the Day of Birth, etc. A book of 144 pages. Bound in
 boards. 40 cts.


 Mother Shipton’s Fortune-Teller; or, Future Fate Foretold by the
 Planets. Being the 900 Answers of Pythagoras to the Questions of
 Life’s Destiny. Derived from the Mystic Numbers and Letters of the
 Planets. Containing the Emblematical and Mystical Wheel of Fortune and
 Fate, colored. 115 pages, paper covers. 30 cts.


 Mother Shipton’s Oriental Dream-Book. Being a reliable interpretation
 of Dreams, Visions, Apparitions, etc. Together with a History of
 Remarkable Dreams, proven true as interpreted. Collected and arranged
 from the most celebrated masters. 16mo, paper covers. 30 cts.


 The Everlasting Fortune-Teller and Magnetic Dream-Book. Containing
 the Science of Foretelling Events by the Signs of the Zodiac; Lists
 of Lucky and Unlucky Days; List of Fortunate Hours; the Science of
 Foretelling Events by Cards, Dice, Dominoes, etc.; the Science of
 Foretelling anything in the Future by Dreams; and also containing
 NAPOLEON’S ORACULUM; or, The Book of Fate. 30 cts.


 Mother Carey’s Dream-Book and Fortune-Teller. Containing the method
 of Fortune-Telling with Cards; a complete Dreamer’s Dictionary; the
 Science of Palmistry, or telling Fortunes by the Lines of the Hand;
 how to tell a Person’s Character by a list of Lucky and Unlucky days
 and hours; how to tell with Cards which of Three Ladies has the best
 Husband. Mathematical Tables for telling any Person’s Age. 15 cts.


 Aristotle’s Book of Fate and Dictionary of Dreams. Containing Dreams
 and their Interpretations; the Signification of Moles on Men and
 Women; one hundred and eighty-seven Weather Omens; Hymen’s Lottery and
 Aristotle’s Oraculum, or Book of Fate.  15 cts.


 The Egyptian Dream-Book and Fortune-Teller. Containing an Alphabetical
 list of Dreams, with their signification and their lucky numbers.
 Illustrated with explanatory diagrams. Boards, cloth back. 40 cts.


 The French Wine and Liquor Manufacturer. A Practical Guide and Receipt
 Book for the Liquor Merchant. Being a clear and comprehensive Treatise
 on the Manufacture and Imitation of Brandy, Rum, Gin and Whisky, with
 Practical Observations and Rules for the Manufacture and Management of
 all kinds of Wine, by Mixing, Boiling and Fermentation, as practiced
 in Europe; including complete instructions for Manufacturing Champagne
 Wine, and the most approved methods for making a variety of Cordials,
 Liquors, Punch, Essences, Bitters and Syrups, together with a number
 of Recipes for Fining, Flavoring, Filtering and Coloring Wines and
 Liquors, and instructions for Restoring and Keeping Ale and Cider.
 Also containing the latest improvements for Manufacturing Vinegar
 by the Quick Method. To which is added a collection of Descriptive
 Articles on Alcohol, Distillation, Maceration and the use of the
 Hydrometer; with Tables, Comparative Scale, and 14 important Rules
 for Purchasing, Reducing and Raising the Strength of Alcohol, etc.
 Illustrated with descriptive diagrams and engravings. Adapted for the
 Use and Information of the Trade in the United States and Canada. By
 John Rack, Practical Wine and Liquor Manufacturer. Bound in cloth.
 $3.00

 Bartender’s Guide. Containing Recipes for Mixing American, English,
 French, German, Italian, Spanish and Russian Drinks—such as Juleps,
 Punches, Cobblers, Slings, Cocktails, etc. By Jerry Thomas, late
 Bartender at the Metropolitan Hotel, New York, and Planter’s House,
 St. Louis. To which is appended a Manual for the Manufacture of
 Cordials, Liquors, Fancy Syrups, etc., containing Recipes after the
 most approved methods now used in the Distillation of Liquors and
 Beverages, designed for the special use of Manufacturers and Dealers
 in Wines and Spirits, Grocers, Tavern-keepers and Private Families—the
 same being adapted to the trade of the United States and Canada. The
 whole work containing over 700 valuable recipes. A large book, bound
 in cloth. $2.50

 The Independent Liquorist; or, The Art of Manufacturing all kinds
 of Syrups, Bitters, Cordials, Champagne, Wines, Lager Beer, Ale,
 Porter, Beer, Punches, Tinctures, Extracts, Brandy, Gin, Essences,
 Flavorings, Colorings, Sauces, Catsups, Pickles, Preserves, etc. By
 L. Monzert, Practical Liquorist and Chemist. Every Druggist, Grocer,
 Restaurant, Hotel-keeper, Farmer, Fruit Dealer, Wine Merchant, should
 have a copy of this work. It gives the most approved methods, and a
 true description of the manner in which our most popular beverages
 are prepared, in such plain terms that the most inexperienced person
 can manufacture as well as the practical man, without the aid of any
 expensive apparatus. 12mo, cloth. $3.00

 The Bordeaux Wine and Liquor Dealer’s Guide. A Treatise on the
 Manufacture of French Wines and Liquors, with full directions to the
 Liquor Dealer how to manage his Liquors, Wines, etc., etc. A book
 of great value to every person who deals in Foreign and American
 Spirituous Liquors, or Foreign Wines, Cordials, etc. It tells exactly
 how all kinds of them are made. The directions are simple and easily
 understood. It also tells how to make all kinds of Ales, Porter and
 other fermented liquor, how to manage Cider, etc. 12mo, cloth. $2.50

 Lacour on the Manufacture of Liquors, Wines and Cordials, Without the
 aid of Distillation. Also, the Manufacture of Effervescing Beverages
 and Syrups, Vinegar and Bitters. Prepared and arranged expressly for
 the Trade. By Pierre Lacour. By the use of this book every man can
 make all kinds of liquors, wines, cordials and vinegar and syrups at
 home, without the use of any apparatus of any kind. The work is by
 the French chemist, Lacour, of Bordeaux. We would advise all who are
 concerned in the liquor business to get the work. Bound in cloth. $2.50


 Dick’s Games of Patience; or Solitaire with Cards. New and Revised
 Edition. Containing Sixty-four Games. Illustrated with Fifty
 explanatory full-page Tableaux. This treatise on Solitaire, a pastime
 which is steadily gaining in popularity, embraces a number of new and
 original Games, and all the Games of Patience at present in favor with
 the most experienced players. This comprehensive work contains the
 following Games:

  _Auld Lang Syne._
  _Tam O’Shanter._
  _The Four Seasons._
  _Simplicity._
  _The Gathering of the Clans._
  _Napoleon at St. Helena._
  _The Calculation._
  _The Surprise Party._
  _The Four Kings._
  _The Clock._
  _The Garden._
  _The Queen’s Audience._
  _The Phalanx._
  _The Idle Year._
  _The Chameleon._
  _La Belle Lucie._
  _The Shamrocks._
  _The House in the Wood._
  _The House on the Hill._
  _The Grand Duchess._
  _The Constitution._
  _The Beleaguered Castle._
  _The Citadel._
  _The Exiled Kings._
  _Penelope’s Web._
  _Napoleon’s Square._
  _The Court Yard._
  _The Windmill._
  _Leoni’s Own._
  _La Nivernaise._
  _The Four Corners._
  _The Baker’s Dozen._
  _The Salic Law._
  _The Sultan of Turkey._
  _The Fortress._
  _The Hemispheres._
  _The Elevens._
  _The Chester Game._
  _The Shah of Persia._
  _The Empress of India._
  _The Zodiac._
  _The Blockade._
  _The Besieged City._
  _The Fourteens._
  _Napoleon’s Favorite._
  _The Fifteen Puzzle._
  _The Contra-Dance._
  _The Betrothal._
  _The Reinforcements._
  _The Reserve._
  _The Frog._
  _The Pyramid._
  _The Quadrille._
  _The Chatelaine._
  _The Order of Precedence._
  _The Congress._
  _Thirteen Down._
  _The Octagon._
  _Light and Shade._
  _St. Louis._
  _Rouge et Noir._
  _The Blondes and Brunettes._
  _The Royal Cotillion._
  _Nestor._

 Each game is carefully and lucidly described, with the distinctive
 rules to be observed and hints as to the best means of success in
 play. The Tableaux furnish efficient aid in rendering the disposition
 of the cards necessary to each game plain and easily comprehensible.
 The difficulty usually attending descriptions of intricate games is
 reduced, as far as possible, by precision in method and terseness of
 expression in the text, and the illustrations serve to dispel any
 possible ambiguity that might be unavoidable without their aid. The
 work is attractive in style and elegant in execution, and will prove
 an interesting companion for many a solitary hour. Quarto. 143 pages.

  Board cover          75 cts.
  Cloth                $1 00.


 Dick’s Parlor Exhibitions, and How to Make them Successful.
 Containing complete and detailed directions for preparing and
 arranging Parlor Exhibitions and Amateur Performances. It includes:

  _Tableaux Vivants._
  _Living Portraits._
  _Living Statuary._
  _Dame History’s Peep Show._
  _Shadow Pantomimes._
  _Popular Ballads illustrated by appropriate action._
  _Charades of all kinds._
  _Parlor Pantomimes._
  _Punch and Judy._

AND FIFTY OTHER DIVERTING PARLOR PASTIMES AND AMUSEMENTS.

 It contains also a full Catalogue of the celebrated  “ART EXHIBITION,”
 and a practical treatise on the wonderful SCIENCE OF SECOND-SIGHT,
 by the aid of which all the startling effects and achievements of
 second-sight may be performed by any one possessing a tolerable
 retentive memory.

 This work is thoroughly practical and gives the fullest instructions
 for preparing and lighting the stage, the construction of the FRAMES
 FOR LIVING PORTRAITS, and shows how each performance can be presented
 with complete success. It is illustrated with numerous engravings
 explaining the text.

  150 pages, paper cover              30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back         50 cts.


 Walker’s Rhyming, Spelling and Pronouncing Dictionary of the English
 Language. Containing

 I. _The whole Language arranged according to its terminations._

 II. _Every Word explained and divided into Syllables, exactly as
 pronounced._

 III. _Multitudes of Words, liable to a double pronunciation, fixed in
 their true sound by a Rhyme._

 IV. _Many of the most difficult Words rendered easy to be pronounced,
 by being classed according to their endings._

 V. _Numerous classes of Words ascertained in their pronunciation, by
 distinguishing them into perfect, nearly perfect and allowable Rhymes._

 To which is added critical and practical Observations on Orthography
 Syllabication, Pronunciation, an Index of Allowable Rhymes, with
 Authorities for their usage, etc. Royal 12mo, 700 pages. $3.00

 Book of Household Pets. Containing valuable instructions about the
 Diseases, Breeding, Training and Management of the Canary, Mocking
 Bird, Brown Thrush or Thrasher, Blue Bird, Yellow Bird, Scarlet
 Tanager, Bobolink, Baltimore Oriole, European Black Bird, Blue Jay,
 Blue and Yellow Macaw, Carolina Parrakeet, Cockatoo, Green and Gray
 Parrot, and the rearing and management of all kinds of Pigeons and
 Fancy Poultry, Rabbits, Squirrels, Guinea Pigs, White Mice and Dogs;
 together with a Comprehensive Treatise on the Principle and Management
 of the Salt and Fresh Water Aquarium, with instructions how to make,
 lay the foundation, and stock the Tank. Illustrated with 123 fine
 wood-cuts. Bound in boards, cloth back. 50 cts.


 Chesterfield’s Art of Letter-Writing Simplified. A Guide to
 Friendly, Affectionate, Polite and Business Correspondence.
 Containing a collection of valuable information relative to the
 Art of Letter-Writing, with clear instructions how to begin and
 end Correspondence, Rules for Punctuation and Spelling, etc., with
 numerous examples of Letters and Notes, with several important hints
 on Love-letters. 15 cts.


 The Life, Crime and Capture of John Wilkes Booth. With a full Sketch
 of the Conspiracy of which he was the Leader, and the Pursuit, Trial
 and Execution of his Accomplices, together with an original Poem on
 Abraham Lincoln. By George Alfred Townsend, a Special Correspondent.
 Illustrated on the cover with a fine portrait of the Assassin and also
 containing Plans, Maps, etc. Octavo. 25 cts.


 The Hindoo Fortune-Teller and Oracle of Destiny. Containing Ten
 Methods of Telling Fortunes with Cards, a complete system of Fortune
 Telling with Dice, together with Sixty-seven Good and Bad Omens, with
 their interpretation. 15 cts.


 The Combination Fortune-Teller and Dictionary of Dreams. A
 Comprehensive Encyclopedia explaining all the different methods
 extant by which good and evil events, are foretold, containing 430
 pages, and illustrated with numerous engravings and two large colored
 lithographs. 16mo, cloth. $1.25.

 The Play-Ground; or, Out-Door Games for Boys. A Book of Healthy
 Recreations for Youth, containing over a hundred Amusements, including
 Games of Activity and Speed, Games with Toys, Marbles, Tops, Hoops,
 Kites, Archery, Balls; with Cricket, Croquet and Base-Ball. Splendidly
 illustrated with 124 fine wood-cuts. Bound in boards. 50 cts.


 10,000 Wonderful Things. Comprising the Marvelous and Rare, Eccentric
 and Extraordinary, in all Ages and Nations. Enriched with hundreds of
 illustrations. 12mo, cloth, gilt side. $1.50


 Allyn’s Ritual of Freemasonry. Containing a complete Key to the
 following Degrees: Degree of Entered Apprentice; Degree of Fellow
 Craft; Degree of Master Mason; Degree of Mark Master; Degree of Past
 Master; Degree of Excellent Master; Degree of Royal Arch; Royal Arch
 Chapter; Degree of Royal Master; Degree of Select Master; Degree of
 Super-Excellent Master; Degree of Ark and Dove; Degree of Knights
 of Constantinople; Degree of Secret Monitor; Degree of Heroine of
 Jericho; Degree of Knights of Three Kings; Mediterranean Pass; Order
 of Knights of the Red Cross; Order of Knights Templar and Knights of
 Malta; Knights of the Christian Mark, and Guards of the Conclave;
 Knights of the Holy Sepulchre; The Holy and Thrice Illustrious Order
 of the Cross; Secret Master; Perfect Master; Intimate Secretary;
 Provost and Judge; Intendant of the Buildings, or Master in Israel;
 Elected Knights of Nine; Elected Grand Master; Sublime Knights
 Elected; Grand Master Architect; Knights of the Ninth Arch; Grand
 Elect. Perfect and Sublime Mason. Illustrated with 38 copper-plate
 engravings; to which is added, a Key to the Phi Beta Kappa, Orange
 and Odd Fellows Societies. By Avery Allyn, K. R. C. K. T. K. M., etc.
 12mo, cloth

  $5.00


 Lester’s  “Look to the East.” (Webb Work.) A Ritual of the First
 Three Degrees of Masonry. Containing the complete work of the Entered
 Apprentice, Fellow Craft and Master Mason’s Degrees, and their
 Ceremonies, Lectures, etc. Edited by Ralph P. Lester. This complete
 and beautiful Pocket Manual of the First Three Degrees of Masonry, is
 printed in clear, legible type, and not obscured by any attempts at
 cypher or other perplexing contractions. It differs entirely from all
 other Manuals, from the fact that it contains neither the passwords,
 grips, nor any other purely esoteric matter, with which Masons, and
 Masons only are necessarily entirely familiar. It affords, therefore,
 a thorough and valuable guide to the regular  “work” in the above
 degrees, divested of everything that any member of the Fraternity
 would object to see in print, or hesitate to carry in his pocket. It
 gives the correct routine of

  _Opening and Closing the Lodge in each Degree._
  _Calling Off and calling On._
  _Calling the Lodge Up and Down._
  _The Entire Ceremonies of Initiating, Passing and Raising Candidates._
  _The Lectures all Ritually and Monitorially Complete._

  Bound in cloth                                    $2.00
  Leather tucks (pocket-book style), gilt edges     $2.50


 Duncan’s Masonic Ritual and Monitor; _or, Guide to the Three
 Symbolic Degrees of the Ancient York Rite, Entered Apprentice,
 Fellow Craft and Master Mason_. And to the Degrees of Mark Master,
 Past Master, Most Excellent Master, and the Royal Arch. By Malcom
 C. Duncan. Explained and Interpreted by copious Notes and numerous
 Engravings. It is not so much the design of the author to gratify the
 curiosity of the uninitiated, as to furnish a Guide to the Younger
 Members of the Order, by means of which their progress from grade to
 grade may be facilitated. With the aid of this invaluable Masonic
 Companion, any mason can, in a short time, become qualified to take
 the Chair as Master of a Lodge. Nothing is omitted in it that may tend
 to impart a full understanding of the principles of Masonry. This is a
 valuable book for the Fraternity, containing, as it does, the Modern
  “Work” of the order. No Mason should be without it.

  Bound in cloth                                       $2.50
  Leather tucks (pocket-book style), with gilt edges    3.00


 Lander’s Expose of Odd-Fellowship. Containing all the Lectures
 complete, with regulations for Opening, Conducting and Closing a
 Lodge; together with Forms of Initiation. Charges of the various
 Officers, etc., giving all the work in the following Degrees: 1st, or
 White Degree; 2d, or Covenant Decree; 3d, or Royal Blue Degree; 4th,
 or Remembrance Degree; 5th, or Scarlet Degree

  25 cts.


 Martine’s Manual of Etiquette and Perfect Letter-Writer. For the use
 of both Ladies and Gentlemen. A great many books have been, printed
 on the subject of Etiquette and correct behavior in society; but none
 of them are sufficiently comprehensive and matter-of-fact to suit the
 class of people who may be called new-beginners in fashionable life.
 This book explains in a plain, common-sense way, precisely how to
 conduct yourself in every position in society. This book also contains
 over 300 sensible letters and notes suitable to every occasion. It has
 some excellent model letters of friendship and business, and its model
 Love-Letters are unequaled. If any lady or gentleman desires to know
 how to begin a love correspondence, this is just the book they want.
 This volume contains the same matter as  “_Martine’s Hand-Book of
 Etiquette_” and  “_Martine’s Sensible Letter-Writer_,” and, in fact,
 combines those two books bound together in one substantial volume of
 373 pages. Cloth, gilt.

  $1.50


 Frost’s Original Letter-Writer, and Laws and By-Laws of American
 Society, combined. Being a complete collection of Original Letters
 and Notes upon every imaginable subject of every-day life, and a
 condensed but thorough treatise on Etiquette and its Usages in
 America. By S. A. Frost. This book consists of Miss Frost’s two
 celebrated works on Etiquette and Letter Writing, bound together in
 one substantial volume. Anybody who wants a book that will tell them
 how to appear to advantage in society, or how to write a letter on
 almost any subject, should send for a copy of this valuable work.
 16mo, 378 pages, extra cloth.

  $1.50


 One Hundred and Thirty Comic Dialogues and Recitations. Being
 Barton’s Comic Recitations and Humorous Dialogues, and Spencer’s
 Comic Speeches and Dialogues, combined in one volume. This capital
 book contains an endless variety of Comic Speeches, Humorous Scenes,
 Amusing Burlesques and Diverting Dialogues. It embraces French, Dutch,
 Irish, Ethiopian and Yankee Stories, and from its fruitful pages may
 be selected enough fun to make any entertainment a success. Bound in
 cloth.

  $1.50


 Frost’s School and Exhibition Dialogues. Comprising Frost’s Humorous
 Exhibition Dialogues, and Frost’s Dialogues for Young Folks, combined
 in one volume. By getting this excellent book, the difficulty in
 procuring a good dialogue for a school exhibition will be entirely
 overcome. It contains sixty-one good dialogues of every shade and
 variety, and from its well-stored pages may be selected enough
 original matter to insure the success of a score of entertainments.
 Bound in cloth.

  $1.50

 Twenty-six Short and Amusing Plays for Private Theatricals. Being
 Howard’s Drawing-room Theatricals and Hudson’s Private Theatricals
 combined in one volume. This book, as the title implies, contains
 twenty-six of the best plays that can be selected for a private
 theatrical entertainment. It contains several amusing plays for one
 sex only, and is thus adapted for the army, navy, and male or female
 boarding-schools. It contains plain directions for getting up a good
 amateur performance. Bound in cloth.

  $1.50

 Dr. Valentine’s Comic Lectures; or, Morsels of Mirth for the
 Melancholy. Comprising Comic Lectures on Heads, Faces, Noses, Mouths,
 Animal Magnetism, etc., with Specimens of Eloquence, Transactions of
 Learned Societies, Delineations of Eccentric Characters, Comic Songs,
 etc., etc. By Dr. W. Valentine. Illustrated with 12 portraits of Dr.
 Valentine in his most celebrated characters. Paper covers.

  75 cts.


 Broad Grins of the Laughing Philosopher. This book is full of the
 drollest and queerest incidents imaginable, interspersed with jokes,
 quaint sayings and funny pictures. It also contains twenty-nine
 laughable engravings

  13 cts.


 The American Boy’s Book of Sports and Games. A Repository of In
 and Out-Door Amusements for Boys and Youths. Containing 600 large
 12mo pages. Illustrated with, nearly 700 engravings, designed by
 White, Herrick, Weir and Harvey, and engraved by N. Orr. This is
 unquestionably the most attractive and valuable book of its kind
 ever issued in this or any other country. It was three years in
 preparation, and embraces all the sports and games that tend to
 develop the physical constitution, improve the mind and heart, and
 relieve the tedium of leisure hours, both in the parlor and the
 field. The engravings are in the first style of the art, and embrace
 eight full-page ornamental titles, and four large colored chromos,
 illustrating the several departments of the work, beautifully printed
 on tinted paper. The book is issued in the best style, being printed
 on fine sized paper, and handsomely bound. Extra cloth, gilt side and
 back, extra gold, beveled boards.

  $2.00


 Mrs. Crowen’s American Lady’s Cookery Book. Giving every variety of
 information for ordinary and holiday occasions, and containing over
 1,200 Original Receipts for Preparing and Cooking Soups and Broths,
 Fish and Oysters, Clams, Mussels, Crabs and Terrapins, Meats of all
 kinds, Poultry and Game, Eggs and Cheese, Vegetables and Salads,
 Sauces of all kinds, fancy Desserts, Puddings and Custards, Pies and
 Tarts, Bread and Biscuit, Rolls and Cakes, Preserves and Jellies,
 Pickles and Catsups, Potted Meats, etc., etc.; with valuable hints
 on choosing and purchasing all kinds of provisions, on preparing
 ripe fruits for the table, Bills of Fare for the guidance of young
 housekeepers, the arrangement of the table for Dinner Parties, the
 Etiquette of the Dinner-table, Cookery for invalids, Carving made
 easy, etc., the whole being a complete system of American Cookery. By
 Mrs. T. J. Crowen. 480 pages, 12mo, cloth.

  $1.50


 The Reason Why of General Science. A careful collection of some
 thousands of Reasons for things which, though generally known, are
 imperfectly understood. It is a complete Encyclopedia of Science; and
 persons who have never had the advantage of a liberal education may,
 by the aid of this volume, acquire knowledge which the study of years
 only would impart in the ordinary course. It explains everything in
 Science that can be thought of, and the whole is arranged with a full
 index. 346 pages, bound in cloth, gilt, and illustrated with numerous
 wood-cuts.

  $1.50


 Biblical Reason Why. A Handsome Book for Biblical Students, and a
 Guide to Family Scripture Readings. This work gives 1,494 Reasons,
 founded upon the Bible, and assigned by the most eminent Divines
 and Christian Philosophers, for the great and all-absorbing events
 recorded in the History of the Bible, the Life of our Saviour and
 the Acts of his Apostles. It will enable Sunday-school teachers to
 explain most of the obscure and difficult passages that occur in the
 Scriptures. Cloth, gilt.

  $1.50


 The Reason Why of Natural History. An illustrated book of popular
 information on all matters relating to Birds, Beasts, Fishes,
 Reptiles, etc. It gives the Reasons for hundreds of interesting
 facts in connection with Zoology, and affords an immense amount of
 instruction in the peculiar habits and instincts of the various orders
 of the Animal Kingdom. Bound in cloth, gilt.

  $1.50


 _The Three Volumes of the REASON WHY SERIES are uniform in size and
 style, and form a valuable addition to every Library._

Souillard’s Book of Practical Receipts. For the use of Families,
Druggists, Perfumers, Confectioners, and Dealers in Soaps and Fancy
Articles for the Toilet. By F. A. Souillard. Paper covers.

  25 cts.


 The Amateur Printer; _or, Type-Setting at Home._ A thorough and
 complete instructor for the amateur in all the details of the
 Printer’s Art, giving practical information in regard to type, ink,
 paper and all the implements requisite, with illustrated directions
 for using them in a proper manner. It teaches how to set type in the
 stick, transfer the matter to the galley and make it up in forms; also
 how to take proofs and correct them, showing all the signs used by
 practical proof-readers in correcting proofs; it illustrates the plan
 of the type-case, showing the relative positions of the compartments
 allotted to the type of each letter, etc., and the correct manner of
 replacing or distributing type in the case! The practical instructions
 given in this work are complete and so plainly described that any
 amateur can become a good printer by studying and applying the
 information it contains. Paper covers.

  Price       25 cts.


 Talk of Uncle George to his Nephew About Draw Poker. Containing
 valuable suggestions in connection with this Great American Game;
 also instructions and directions to Clubs and Social Card Parties,
 whose members play only for recreation and pastime, with timely
 warnings to young players. Illustrated. In which Uncle George narrates
 to his nephew the experience he has gathered in the course of his
 travels West and East; showing him, in a chatty and familiar style,
 the devices, tricks, appliances, and advantages by which gentlemanly
 gamblers fleece the unsophisticated and unwary in the popular game of
 Draw Poker, and offering him plain and fatherly advice as to the best
 means for frustrating their efforts and avoiding their traps. Every
 one who takes a hand at  “Draw” will be a gainer by perusing what
 Uncle George says about it, and become a wiser as well as a richer
 man. Quarto. Paper.

  Price       25 cts.


 Proctor on Draw-Poker. A Critical Dissertation on  “Poker Principles
 and Chance Laws.” By Prof. RICHARD A. PROCTOR. An interesting Treatise
 on the Laws and Usages which govern the Game of Draw-Poker, with
 Practical Remarks upon the Chances and Probabilities of the Game,
 and a Critical Analysis of the Theories and Statistics advanced by
 Blackbridge and other writers on the subject, and especially in regard
 to their doctrines relating to cumulative recurrences. Small quarto.

  15 cts.


 Lander’s Revised Work of Odd-Fellowship. Containing all the
 Lectures, complete, with Regulations for Opening, Conducting, and
 Closing a Lodge; together with Forms of Initiation, Charges of the
 Various Officers, etc., with the Complete work in the following
 Degrees; Initiation; First, or Pink Degree; Second, or Royal Blue
 Degree; Third, or Scarlet Degree. By EDWIN F. LANDER. This hand-book
 of the Revised Work of the Independent Order of Odd-Fellowship has
 been prepared in conformity with the amendments and alterations
 adopted by the Sovereign Grand Lodge of Canada in September, 1880.
 16mo, paper cover. 25 cts.


 The Jolly Joker; or, a Laugh all Round. An Immense Collection of the
 Funniest Jokes, Drollest Anecdotes and most Side-Splitting Oddities in
 existence, profusely illustrated from beginning to end, in the most
 mirth-provoking style. The illustrations alone are sufficient for a
 constant and long-sustained series of good, square laughs for all
 time. 12mo, 144 pages, illustrated cover.

  25 cts.


 Some Comicalities. A Whole Volume of Jolly Jokes, Quaint Anecdotes,
 Funny Stories, Brilliant Witticisms, and Crushing Conundrums, with as
 many droll illustrations to the page—and every page at that—as can be
 crowded into it. 144 pages. Illustrated cover.

  25 cts.


Dick’s Dutch, French and Yankee Dialect Recitations.

An unsurpassed Collection, of Droll Dutch Blunders, Frenchmen’s Funny
Mistakes, and Ludicrous and Extravagant Yankee Yarns, each Recitation
being in its own dialect.

DUTCH DIALECT.

  Der Mule Shtood on der Steamboad Deck.
  Go Vay, Becky Miller.
  Der Drummer.
  Mygel Snyder’s Barty.
  Snyder’s Nose.
  Dyin’ Vords of Isaac.
  Fritz und I.
  Betsey und I Hafe Bust Ub.
  Schneider sees Leah.
  Dot Funny Leetle Baby.
  Schnitzeri’s Philosopede.
  Der Dog und der Lobster.
  Schlosser’s Ride.
  Mine Katrine.
  Maud Muller.
  Ein Deutsches Lied.
  Hans and Fritz.
  Schneider’s Tomatoes.
  Deitsche Advertisement.
  Vas Bender Henshpecked.
  Life, Liberty and Lager.
  Der Goot Lookin’ Shnow.
  Mr. Schmidt’s Mistake.
  Home Again.
  Dot Surprise Party.
  Der Wreck of der Hezberus.
  Isaac Rosenthal on the Chinese Question.
  Hans Breitmann’s Party.
  Shoo Flies.
  A Dutchman’s Answer.
  How Jake Schneider Went Blind.
  I Vash so Glad I Vash Here.
  The Dutchman and the Yankee.
  How the Dutchman Killed the Woodchuck.
  Der Nighd Pehind Grisdmas.
  The Dutchman’s Snake.
  Yoppy’s Yarder und Hees Drubbles.
  Dhree Shkaders.
  Katrina Likes Me Poody Vell.
  Hans in a Fix.
  Leedle Yawcob Strauss.
  How a Dutchman was Done.
  Dot Lambs vot Mary Haf Got.
  The Yankee and the Dutchman’s Dog.
  Zwei Lager.
  Schneider’s Ride.
  The Dutchman and the Small-pox.
  Tiamondts on der Prain.
  A Dutchman’s Testimony in a Steamboat Case.
  Hans Breitmann and the Turners.

FRENCH DIALECT.

  The Frenchman’s Dilemma; or, Number Five Collect Street.
  The Frenchman’s Revenge.
  Noozell and the Organ Grinder.
  How a Frenchman Entertained John Bull.
  Mr. Rogers and Monsieur Denise.
  The Frenchman and the Landlord.
  The Frenchman and the Sheep’s Trotters.
  A Frenchman’s Account of the Fall.
  I Vant to Fly.
  The Generous Frenchman.
  The Frenchman and the Flea Powder.
  The Frenchman and the Rats.
  Monsieur Tonson.
  Vat You Please.
  The Frenchman and the Mosquitoes.
  The Frenchman’s Patent Screw.
  The Frenchman’s Mistake.
  Monsieur Mocquard Between Two Fires.

YANKEE DIALECT.

  Mrs. Bean’s Courtship.
  Hez and the Landlord.
  Squire Billings’ Pickerel.
  Deacon Thrush in Meeting.
  The Yankee Fireside.
  Peter Sorghum in Love.
  Mrs. Smart Learns how to Skate.
  Capt. Hurricane Jones on the Miracles.
  The Dutchman and the Yankee.
  The Yankee Landlord.
  The Bewitched Clock.
  The Yankee and the Dutchman’s Dog.
  Aunt Hetty on Matrimony.
  The Courtin’.
  Ebenezer on a Bust.
  Sut Lovingood’s Shirt.

This Collection contains all the best dialect pieces that are
incidentally scattered through a large number of volumes of
 “Recitations and Readings,” besides new and excellent sketches never
before published.

  170 pages, paper cover           30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Dick’s Irish Dialect Recitations. A carefully compiled Collection of
 Rare Irish Stories, Comic, Poetical and Prose Recitations, Humorous
 Letters and Funny Recitals, all told with the irresistible Humor of
 the Irish dialect. Containing

  Biddy’s Troubles.
  Birth of St. Patrick, The.
  Bridget O’Hoolegoin’s Letter.
  Connor.
  Dermot O’Dowd.
  Dick Macnamara’s Matrimonial Adventures.
  Dying Confession of Paddy M’Cabe.
  Father Molloy.
  Father Phil Blake’s Collection.
  Father Roach.
  Fight of Hell-Kettle, The.
  Handy Andy’s Little Mistakes.
  How Dennis Took the Pledge.
  How Pat Saved his Bacon.
  Irish Astronomy.
  Irish Coquetry.
  Irish Drummer, The.
  Irish Letter, An.
  Irish Philosopher, The.
  Irish Traveler, The.
  Irishman’s Panorama, The.
  Jimmy McBride’s Letter.
  Jimmy Butler and the Owl.
  King O’Toole and St. Kevin.
  Kitty Malone.
  Love in the Kitchen.
  Micky Free and the Priest.
  Miss Malony on the Chinese Question.
  Mr. O’Hoolahan’s Mistake.
  Paddy Blake’s Echo.
  Paddy Fagan’s Pedigree.
  Paddy McGrath and the Bear.
  Paddy O’Rafther.
  Paddy the Piper.
  Paddy’s Dream.
  Pat and the Fox.
  Pat and the Gridiron.
  Pat and his Musket.
  Pat and the Oysters.
  Pat’s Criticism.
  Pat’s Letter.
  Pat O’Flanigan’s Colt.
  Patrick O’Rouke and the Frogs.
  Paudeen O’Rafferty’s Say Voyage.
  Peter Mulrooney and the Black Filly.
  Phaidrig Crohoore.
  Rory O’More’s Present to the Priest.
  St. Kevin.
  Teddy O’Toole’s Six Bulls.
  Wake of Tim O’Hara, The.
  Widow Cummiskey, The.

This Collection contains, in addition to new and original pieces, all
the very best Recitations in the Irish dialect that can be gathered
from a whole library of  “Recitation” books. It is full of sparkling
witticisms and it furnishes also a fund of entertaining matter for
perusal in leisure moments.

  170 pages, paper cover           30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Beecher’s Recitations and Readings. Humorous, Serious, Dramatic.
 Designed for Public and Private Exhibitions. Contents:

  Miss Maloney at the Dentist’s
  Lost and Found
  Mygel Snyder’s Barty
  Magdalena
  Jim Wolfe and the Cats
  The Woolen Doll
  The Charity Dinner
  Go-Morrow; or, Lots Wife
  The Wind and the Moon
  Dyin’ Words of Isaac
  Maude Muller in Dutch
  Moses the Sassy
  Yarn of the  “Nancy Bell”
  Paddy the Piper
  Schneider sees  “Leah”
  Caldwell of Springfield
  Artemus Ward’s Panorama
  Tale of a Servant Girl
  How a Frenchman Entertained John Bull
  Tiamondts on der Prain
  King Robert of Sicily
  Gloverson the Mormon
  De Pint wid Ole Pete
  Pat and the Pig
  The Widow Bedott’s Letter
  The Cry of the Children
  The Dutchman and the Small-pox
  Sculpin
  Rats [TN: possibly Bats]—Descriptive Recitation
  A Reader Introduces Himself to an Audience
  A Dutchman’s Dolly Varden
   “Rock of Ages”
  Feeding the Black Fillies
  The Hornet
  The Glove and the Lions
  I Vant to Fly
  That Dog of Jim Smiley’s
  The Faithful Soul
   “My New Pittayatees”
  Mary Ann’s Wedding
  An Inquiring Yankee
  The Three Bells
  Love in a Balloon
  Mrs. Brown on the Streets
  Shoo Flies
  Discourse by the Rev. Mr. Bosan
  Without the Children
  Signor Billsmethi’s Dancing Academy
  Der Goot Lookin Shnow
  The Jumping Frog
  The Lost Chord
  The Tale of a Leg
  That West-side Dog
  How Dennis Took the Pledge
  The Fisherman’s Summons
  Badger’s Debut as Hamlet
  Hezekiah Stole the Spoons
  Paddy’s Dream
  Victuals and Drink
  How Jake Schneider Went Blind
  Aurelia’s Young Man
  Mrs. Brown on Modern Houses
  Farm Yard Song
  Murphy’s Pork Barrel
  The Prayer Seeker
  An Extraordinary Phenomenon
  The Case of Young Bangs
  A Mule Ride in Florida
  Dhree Shkaders

  Paper covers. Price              30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Dick’s Ethiopian Scenes, Variety Sketches and Stump Speeches.
 Containing the following Rich Collection of Negro Dialogues, Scenes,
 Farces, End-men’s Jokes, Gags, Rollicking Stories, Excruciating
 Conundrums, Questions and Answers for Bones, Tambo and Interlocutor,
 etc. Contents:

  I’s Gwine to Jine de Masons
  Jes’ Nail dat Mink to de Stable Do’—Oration
  But the Villain still Pursued Her—A Thrilling Tale
  Bones at a Free-and-Easy
  Buncombe Speech
  Shakespeare Improved
  End Gag—Bones and Tambo
  A Man of Nerve—Comic Sketch
  End Gag—Bones and Tambo
  Uncle Pete—Darkey Sketch
  The Rival Darkeys
  The Stage-Struck Darkey
  Add Ryman’s Fourth of July Oration
  Absent-Mindedness—Bones and Tambo
  Don’t Call a Man a Liar
  The Mysterious Larkey
  Rev. Uncle Jim’s Sermon
  The ’Possum-Run Debating Society
  Tim Murphy’s Irish Stew
  Brudder Bones in Love—Interlocutor and Bones
  ’Lixey; or, The Old Gum Game—Negro Scene
  Brudder Bones’ Duel
  Brudder Bones’ Sweetheart
  Brudder Bones in Hard Luck
  Two Left-Bones and Tambo
  Speech on Boils
  How Bones Cured a Smoky Chimney
  Sermon on Keards, Hosses, Fiddlers, etc.
  Huggin’ Lamp-Posts
  Not Opposed to Matrimony
  How Pat Sold a Dutchman
  The Coopers—one Act Farce
  Questions Easily Answered—Bones and Tambo
  Examination in Natural History—Minstrel Dialogue
  O’Quirk’s Sinecure
  The Widower’s Speech
  Bones at a Raffle
  Uncle Pete’s Sermon
  Bones at a Soiree—Interlocutor and Bones
  Speech on Woman’s Rights
  Bones’ Discovery
  Mark Twain Introduces Himself—Characteristic Speech
  Speech on Happiness
  Burnt Corkers—Minstrel Dialogue
  The Nervous Woman
  The Five Senses—Minstrel Dialogue
  The Dutchman’s Experience
  Essay on the Wheelbarrow
  Bones at a Pic-Nic
  The Virginia Mummy—Negro Farce
  Brudder Bones in Clover
  Artemus Ward’s Advice to Husbands
  Where the Lion Roareth, and the Wang-Doodle Mourneth
  Romeo and Juliet in 1880
  Artemus Ward’s Panorama
  Brudder Bones as a Carpet-Bagger—Interlocutor and Bones
  Major Jones’ Fourth of July Oration
  Curiosities for a Museum—Minstrel Dialogue
  Burlesque Oration on Matrimony
  Brudder Bones on the Raging Canawl
  The Snackin’-Turtle Man—Ethiopian Sketch
  Bones’ Dream—Ethiopian Sketch
  Come and Hug Me
  Widow O’Brien’s Toast
  Scenes at the Police Court—Musical Minstrel Dialogue
  Brudder Bones as a Log-Roller
  De Pint Wid Old Pete—Negro Dialect Recitation
  A Touching Appeal—Dutch Dialect Recitation
  Wounded in the Corners
  Darkey Dialogue
  End Gag—Interlocutor and Bones

  178 pages, paper covers            30 cts.
  Bound in board, cloth back         50 cts.


 Tambo’s End-Men’s Minstrel Gags. Containing some of the best Jokes
 and Repartees of the most celebrated  “burnt cork” performers of our
 day. Tambo and Bones in all sorts and manner of scrapes. This Book
 is full of Burnt-Cork Drolleries, Funny Stories, Colored Conundrums,
 Gags and Witty Repartee, all the newest side-splitting conversations
 between Tambo, Bones, and the Interlocutor, and will be found useful
 alike to the professional and amateur performer. Contents:

  A Bird that can’t be Plucked
  Annihilating Time
  At Last
  Bashful
  Bet, The
  Big Fortune, A
  Blackberrying
  Black Swan, The
  Bones and his little Game
  Bones and the Monkey Tricks
  Bones as a Fortune Teller
  Bones as a Legitimate Actor
  Bones as a Pilot
  Bones as a Prize Fighter
  Bones as a  “Stugent”
  Bones as a Traveler
  Bones as a Victim to the Pen
  Bones as a Walkist
  Bones assists at the Performance of a New Piece
  Bones attends a Seance
  Bones finds Himself Famous
  Bones gets Dunned
  Bones gets Stuck
  Bones has a Small Game with the Parson
  Bones’ Horse Race
  Bones in an Affair of Honor
  Bones in Love
  Bones keeps a Boarding House
  Bones on the War Path
  Bones on George Washington
  Bones on the Light Fantastic
  Bones Opens a Spout Shop
  Bones Plays O’Fella
  Bones sees a Ghost
  Bones Slopes with Sukey Sly
  Bones tells a  “Fly” Story
  Brother will come home tonight
  Bones as a Carpet Bagger
  Bones as an Inkslinger
  Bones in a New Character
  Bones in Clover
  Bones’ Love Scrape
   “Cullud” Ball, The
  Conundrums
  Curious Boy
  Dancing Mad
  Dat’s What I’d Like to Know
  Definitions
  De Mudder of Inwention
  Difference, The
  Don’t Kiss every Puppy
   “Far Away in Alabam’”
  First White Man, The
  Fishy Argument
  Four-Eleven-Forty-Four
  Four Meetings, The
  From the Poiks
  Girl at the Sewing Machine
  Hard Times
  Hard to take a Hint
  Heavy Spell, A
  Highfalutin’
  Horrible!
  How Bones became a Minstrel
  How Tambo took his Bitters
  How to do it
  Impulsive Oration
  Inquisitive
  Jeallusest of her Sect
  Legal Problem, A
  Liberal Discount for Cash
  Manager in a Fix, The
  Mathematics
  Merry Life, A
  Momentous Question
  Mosquitoes
  Music
  Notes
  Ob Course
  Our Shop Girls
  Pomp and Ephy Green
  Presidency on de Brain
  Proposed Increase of Taxes
  Railroad Catastrophe
  Reality versus Romance
  Rough on Tambo
  Sassy Sam and Susie Long
  School’s In
  Shakespeare with a Vengeance
  Simple Sum in Arithmetic
  Sleighing in the Park
  Sliding Down the Hill
  Style
  Sublime
  Swearing by Proxy
  Tambo’s Travelling Agent
  That Dear Old Home
   “The Pervisions, Josiar”
  Thieves
  Tonsorial
  Toast, A
  Uncle Eph’s Lament
  Waiting to See Him Off
  You Bet
  And 40 popular songs and dances.

  Everything new and rich. Paper covers      30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back           50 cts.


 McBride’s Comic Speeches and Recitations. Designed for Schools,
 Literary and Social Circles. By H. Elliott McBride, Author of
  “McBride’s Humorous Dialogues,” etc., etc. This is one of the very
 best series of original speeches, in Yankee, Darkey, Spread-Eagle and
 village styles, with a number of diverting addresses and recitations,
 and funny stories, forming an excellent volume of selections for
 supplying the humorous element of an exhibition. Contents:

  A Burst of Indignation
  Disco’se by a Colored Man
  A Trumpet Sarmon
  Sarmon on Skilletvillers
  Nancy Matilda Jones
  Hezekiah’s Proposal
  About the Billikinses
  Betsy and I are Out Once More
  A Stump Speech
  About Katharine
  Deborah Doolittle’s Speech on Women’s Rights
  A Salutatory
  A Mournful Story
  An Address to Schoolboys
  Zachariah Popp’s Courtship and Marriage
  A Sad Story
  How to Make Hasty Pudding
  My Matilda Jane
  Courtship, Marriage, Separation and Reunion
  Lecture by a Yankee
  A Colored Man’s Disco’se on Different Subjects
  A Girl’s Address to Boys
  McSwinger’s Fate
  Peter Peabody’s Stump Speech
  Mr. Styx Rejoices on Account of a New Well Spring
  Victuals and Drink
  Speech by Billy Higgins on the Destruction of His Rambo Apple Tree
  A Boy’s Address to Young Ladies
  An Old Man’s Address to Young Wives
  Salu-ta-tat-u-a-ry
  Valedictory.

  Paper covers, illuminated       30 cts.
  Board covers, illuminated       50 cts.


 Burton’s Amateur Actor. A Complete Guide to Private Theatricals;
 giving plain directions for arranging, decorating and lighting the
 Stage and its appurtenances, with rules and suggestions for mounting,
 rehearsing and performing all kinds of Plays, Parlor Pantomimes and
 Shadow Pantomimes. Illustrated with numerous engravings, and including
 a selection of original Plays, with Prologues, Epilogues, etc. By
 C. E. Burton.

CONTENTS.

  How to form an Amateur Company.
  Duties of the Manager and Prompter.
  Theatrical Music.
  Rules for an Amateur Company.
  How to Arrange a Stage.
  How to Make a Curtain.
  How to Light the Stage.
  Colored and Calcium Light Effects.
  How to Make and Paint the Scenes.
  How to Imitate Moonlight, Sunrise, Thunder, Rain, Wind and various
    other effects.
  How to make all kinds of  “Properties.”
  How to make up Dresses, Wigs, Beards, etc.
  How to  “make up” the Face to imitate Old Men and other characters.
  General Directions for Acting.
  Stage Business, Entrances and Exits.
  Four Appropriate Prologues; Three Epilogues.
  On the Selection of Plays.
  A Family Fix. Comedy for Three Males and three Females.
  The Philopena. Comedy for two Males and one Female.
  Directions for Performing Parlor Pantomimes.
  Love’s Obstacles; or, Jack’s Triumph. An Original Parlor Pantomime.
  Complete Directions for Performing Shadow Pantomimes.
  Detailed Instructions for producing all Shadow Illusions.
  The Feejee Islanders at Home. An Original and unequaled Shadow
    Pantomime.
  A list of Farces, Comedies, etc., specially adapted to Parlor
    Performances, with the Characters of Each Enumerated and Described.

  16mo, illuminated paper covers. Price      30 cts.
  Bound in Boards                            50 cts.


 Howard’s Book of Drawing-Room Theatricals. A collection of short and
 amusing plays in one act and one scene, especially adapted for private
 performances; with practical directions for their preparation and
 management. Some of the plays are adapted for performers of one sex
 only.

          CONTENTS.
                                     Males. Females.
  Explanations of stage directions.  |     |     |
  Hints to Amateurs.                 |     |     |
  The Student’s Frolic               |  3  |  2  |
  A Household Fairy                  |  1  |  1  |
  A Kiss in the Dark                 |  2  |  3  |
  Mrs. Willis’ Will                  |     |  5  |
  Jack of all Trades                 |  6  |     |
  His First Brief                    |  3  |  2  |
  A Sudden Arrival                   |  5  |     |
  A Medical Man                      |  2  |  1  |
  A Terrible Secret                  |  2  |  2  |
  Poisoned                           |  4  |     |
  An Eligible Situation              |  2  |  6  |
   “Wanted a Young Lady”              |  2  |  1  |

  Paper Covers. Price                     30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back        50 cts.


 Tambo’s End-Men’s Minstrel Gags. Containing some of the best jokes
 and repartees of the most celebrated  “burnt cork” performers of
 our day. Tambo and Bones in all sorts and manner of scrapes. Also
 containing a rich collection of Ballads, humorous and pathetic. Darkey
 Dialogues, Sketches, Plantation Scenes, Eccentric Doings, Humorous
 Lectures, Laughable Interludes, Huge Africanisms, Burlesque Stump
 Speeches. Mirth-provoking Witticisms, Conundrums, Yarns, Plantation
 Songs and Dances, etc., etc. In short, a complete Hand-Book of Burnt
 Cork Drollery, which will be found alike useful to the professional
 and amateur. Everything new and rich.

  Paper covers.                            30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back         50 cts.


 Tony Denier’s Parlor Tableaus, or Living Pictures. Containing
 about eighty popular subjects, with plain and explicit directions
 for arranging the stage, dressing-rooms, lights, full description of
 costumes, duties of stage manager, properties and scenery required,
 and all the necessary directions for getting them up. Among the
 contents there are nine tableaux for _male_ and an equal number for
 _female_ characters only. A great number of them introduce groups of
 boys, and many more groups of girls only; others again introducing
 both; and still more in which entire classes can take part. Everything
 is stated in a plain, simple manner, so that it will be easily
 understood; everything like style or unnecessary show has been
 avoided. For public or private entertainment, there is nothing which
 is so interesting as the tableau.

  Price        25 cts.


 Tony Denier’s Secret of Performing Shadow Pantomimes. Showing how to
 get them up and how to act in them; with full and concise instructions
 and numerous illustrations. Also full and complete descriptions of
 properties and costumes.

CONTENTS.

Introduction; Shadow Bluff, or, Who’s Who? Tooth Drawing Extraordinary;
Amputation like Winking; The Haunted House; We Won’t Go Home till
Morning; Jocko, or the Mischievous Monkey; The Madcap Barber; Cribbage,
or, The Devil among the Cards; The Lover’s Stratagem; The Game of Base
Ball; Regular Hash, or, The Boarding-House Conspiracy; The Mechanical
Statue; The African Serenaders; The Model Prize Fight; The Magic Cask,
or, The Industrious and Idle Apprentice; The Tragical Duel, or, The
Comical Rivals; Old Dame Trot and her Comical Cat.

  Price          25 cts.


 Brudder Bones’ Book of Stump Speeches and Burlesque Orations. Also
 containing Humorous Lectures, Dialogues, Plantation Scenes, Negro
 Farces and Burlesques, Laughable Interludes and Comic Recitations,
 interspersed with Dutch, Irish, French and Yankee Stories. Compiled
 and edited by John F. Scott.

 This book contains some of the best hits of the leading negro
 delineators of the present time, as well as mirth-provoking jokes and
 repartees of the most celebrated End-Men of the day, and specially
 designed for the introduction of fun in an evening’s entertainment.

  Price                30 cts.
  Bound in boards      50 cts.


 Burton’s Amateur Actor. A complete guide to Private Theatricals;
 giving plain directions for arranging, decorating and lighting
 the Stage; with rules and suggestions for mounting, rehearsing
 and performing all kinds of Plays, Parlor Pantomimes and Shadow
 Pantomimes. Illustrated with numerous engravings, and including a
 selection of original Plays, with Prologues, Epilogues, etc.

  16mo, illuminated paper cover          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back       50 cts.


                       READINGS AND RECITATIONS.

 Kavanaugh’s New Speeches and Dialogues for Young Children. This is
 an entirely new series of Recitations and short Dialogues, by Mrs.
 Russell Kavanaugh. Containing easy pieces in plain language, readily
 understood by little children, and expressly adapted for School
 Exhibitions and Christmas and other juvenile celebrations.

  Paper cover                         30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back         50 cts.


 Kavanaugh’s Exhibition Reciter, for Very Little Children. A
 collection of entirely Original Recitations, Dialogues, Short Speeches
 and Speaking Tableaux, adapted for very little boys and girls;
 including also a variety of pieces, humorous, serious and dramatic,
 suitable for children from Three to Ten Years Old.

  Paper covers                  30 cts.
  Bound in board covers         50 cts.


 Kavanaugh’s Juvenile Speaker. For Very Little Boys and and Girls.
 Containing short and easily-learned Speeches and Dialogues, expressly
 adapted for School Celebrations, May-Day Festivals and other
 Children’s Entertainments. Embracing one hundred and twenty-three
 effective pieces. By Mrs. Russell Kavanaugh.

  Illuminated paper cover           30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back       50 cts.


 Dick’s Series of Recitations and Readings, Nos. 1 to 15. Comprising
 a carefully compiled selection of Humorous, Pathetic, Eloquent,
 Patriotic and Sentimental Pieces in Poetry and Prose, exclusively
 designed for Recitation or Reading. Edited by Wm. B. Dick. Each number
 of the Series contains about 180 pages.

  Illuminated paper cover, each        30 cts.
  Bound in full cloth                  50 cts.


 Beecher’s Recitations and Readings. Humorous, Serious, Dramatic,
 including Prose and Poetical Selections in Dutch, Yankee, Irish, Negro
 and other Dialects.

  180 pages, paper covers                 30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back             50 cts.


 Howard’s Recitations. Comic, Serious and Pathetic. Being a
 collection of fresh Recitations in Prose and Poetry, suitable for
 Exhibitions and Evening Parties.

  180 pages, paper covers               30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back           50 cts.


 Spencer’s Book of Comic Speeches and Humorous Recitations. A
 collection of Comic Speeches, Humorous Prose and Poetical Recitations,
 Laughable Dramatic Scenes and Eccentric Dialect Stories.

  192 pages, paper covers               30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back           50 cts.


 Wilson’s Book of Recitations and Dialogues. Containing a choice
 selection of Poetical and Prose Recitations. Designed as an Assistant
 to Teachers and Students in preparing Exhibitions.

  188 pages, paper covers               30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back      50 cts.


 Barton’s Comic Recitations and Humorous Dialogues. A variety
 of Comic Recitations in Prose and Poetry, Eccentric Orations and
 Laughable Interludes.

  180 pages, paper covers                   30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back          50 cts.


 Martine’s Droll Dialogues and Laughable Recitations. A collection
 of Humorous Dialogues, Comic Recitations, Brilliant Burlesques and
 Spirited Stump Speeches.

  188 pages, paper covers                  30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back         50 cts.


                        ⁂ CATALOGUES SENT FREE.


                            DIALOGUE BOOKS.

 Graham’s School Dialogues for Young People. Being a new and original
 collection of Dialogues intended for Anniversaries and Exhibitions,
 carefully prepared and well calculated to develop dramatic talent.

  176 pages, illuminated paper cover       30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back              50 cts.


 McBride’s New Dialogues. Especially designed for School and Literary
 Amateur Entertainments; containing twenty-four entirely New and
 Original Dialogues, introducing Irish, Yankee, and other eccentric
 characters. By H. Elliott McBride.

  178 pages, illuminated paper cover          30 cts.
  Bound in boards                             50 cts.


 McBride’s Temperance Dialogues. Designed for the use of Schools,
 Temperance Societies, Bands of Hope, Divisions, Lodges and Literary
 Circles. Introducing Yankee, Dutch, Irish, Negro and other dialect
 characters. By H. Elliott McBride.

  183 pages, paper cover          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back     50 cts.


 McBride’s Humorous Dialogues. A collection of New Dialogues, full
 of humor and witty repartee; some of them introducing Irish, Dutch,
 Yankee and other dialect characters.

  192 pages, paper cover                30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back           50 cts.


 McBride’s Comic Dialogues. A collection of twenty-three Original
 Humorous Dialogues, especially designed for the display of Amateur
 dramatic talent, and introducing a variety of sentimental, sprightly,
 comic and genuine Yankee characters, and other ingeniously developed
 eccentricities. By H. Elliott McBride.

  180 pages, illuminated paper covers      30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back              50 cts.


 McBride’s All Kinds of Dialogues. A collection of twenty-five
 Original, Humorous and Domestic Dialogues, introducing Yankee,
 Irish, Dutch and other characters. Excellently adapted for Amateur
 Performances.

  180 pages, illuminated paper covers        30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back                50 cts.


 Holmes’ Very Little Dialogues for Very Little Folks. Containing
 forty-seven New and Original Dialogues, with short and easy parts,
 almost entirely in words of one syllable, suited to the capacity and
 comprehension of very young children.

  Paper covers                       30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back        50 cts.


 Frost’s Dialogues for Young Folks. A collection of thirty-six
 Original, Moral and Humorous Dialogues. Adapted for boys and girls
 between the ages of ten and fourteen years.

  Paper covers                       30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back        50 cts.


 Frost’s New Book of Dialogues. Containing twenty-nine entirely New
 and Original Humorous Dialogues for boys and girls between the ages of
 twelve and fifteen years.

  180 pages, paper covers          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Frost’s Humorous and Exhibition Dialogues. This is a collection of
 twenty-five Sprightly Original Dialogues in Prose and Verse, intended
 to be spoken at School Exhibitions.

  178 pages, paper covers             30 cts.
  Bound in boards                     50 cts.


AMATEUR THEATRICALS.

 _All the plays in the following excellent books are especially
 designed for Amateur performance. The majority of them are in one act
 and one scene, and may be represented in any moderate-sized parlor,
 without much preparation of costume or scenery._

 Kavanagh’s Humorous Dramas for School Exhibitions and Private
 Theatricals. This collection of Dramas are all original, and were
 written expressly for School and Parlor performance.

  Paper covers                       30 cts.
  Bound in boards                    50 cts.


 Barmby’s Musical Plays for Young People. Suitable for Private
 Theatricals. These Plays are in Burlesque style and entirely in
 Rhyme; they are irresistably Comical in expression, and elegant
 in construction. Each Play includes the Vocal Score and Piano
 Accompaniment to all Songs, Duets and Choruses introduced, making it
 complete in itself, both in text and music.

  201 pages, paper covers          30 cts.
  Bound in boards                  50 cts.


 Parlor Theatricals; or, Winter Evenings’ Entertainment. Containing
 Acting Proverbs, Dramatic Charades, Drawing-Room Pantomimes, a Musical
 Burlesque and an amusing Farce, with instructions for Amateurs.
 Illustrated with engravings.

  Paper covers                         30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back     50 cts.


 Howard’s Book of Drawing-Room Theatricals. A collection of twelve
 short and amusing plays. Some of the plays are adapted for performers
 of one sex only.

  186 pages, paper covers                 30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back        50 cts.


 Hudson’s Private Theatricals. A collection of fourteen humorous
 plays. Four of these plays are adapted for performance by males only,
 and three are for females.

  180 pages, paper covers                  30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back         50 cts.


 Nugent’s Burlesque and Musical Acting Charades. Containing ten
 Charades, all in different styles, two of which are easy and effective
 Comic Parlor Operas, with Music and Piano-forte Accompaniments.

  176 Pages, paper covers                     30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back            50 cts.


 Frost’s Dramatic Proverbs and Charades. Containing eleven Proverbs
 and fifteen Charades, some of which are for Dramatic Performance, and
 others arranged for Tableaux Vivants.

  176 pages, paper covers                  30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back         50 cts.


 Frost’s Parlor Acting Charades. These twelve excellent and original
 Charades are arranged as short parlor Comedies and Farces, full of
 brilliant repartee and amusing situations.

  182 pages, paper covers          30 cts.
  Illuminated boards               50 cts.


 Frost’s Book of Tableaux and Shadow Pantomimes. A collection of
 Tableaux Vivants and Shadow Pantomimes, with stage instructions for
 Costuming, Grouping, etc.

  180 pages, paper covers              30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back     50 cts.


 Frost’s Amateur Theatricals. A collection of eight original plays;
 all short, amusing and new.

  180 pages, paper covers               30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back      50 cts.


 Dick’s Original Album Verses and Acrostics. Containing Original
 Verses.

  _For Autograph Albums_;
  _To Accompany Bouquets_;
  _For Birthday Anniversaries_;
  _For Wooden, Tin, Crystal, Silver and Golden Weddings_;
  _For Album Dedications_;
  _To Accompany Philopena Forfeits_;
  _For Congratulation_;
  _For Valentines in General, and all Trades and Professions._

 It contains also Two Hundred and Eighteen Original Acrostic Verses,
 the initial letters of each verse forming a different Lady’s Christian
 name, the meaning and derivation of the name being appended to each.
 The primary object of this book is to furnish entirely fresh and
 unhackneyed matter for all who may be called upon to fill and adorn
 a page in a Lady’s Album; but it contains also new and appropriate
 verses to suit Birthday, Wedding, and all other Anniversaries and
 Occasions to which verses of Compliment or Congratulation are
 applicable.

  Paper covers.             Price.       50 cts.
  Bound in full cloth         “          75 cts.


 The Debater, Chairman’s Assistant, and Rules of Order. A manual for
 Instruction and Reference in all matters pertaining to the Management
 of Public Meetings according to Parliamentary usages. It comprises:

 _How to Form and Conduct all kinds of Associations and Clubs_;

 _How to Organize and Arrange Public Meetings, Celebrations, Dinners,
 Picnics and Conventions_;

 _Forms for Constitutions of Lyceums or Institutes, Literary and other
 Societies_;

 _The Powers and Duties of Officers, with Forms for Treasurers’,
 Secretaries’, and other Official Reports_;

 _The Formation and Duties of Committees_;

 _Rules of Order, and Order of Business, with Mode of Procedure in all
 Cases_;

 _How to draft Resolutions and other Written Business_;

 _A Model Debate, introducing the greatest possible variety of points
 of order, with correct Decisions by the Chairman_;

 _The Rules of Order, in Tabular Form, for instant reference in all
 Cases of Doubt that may arise, enabling a Chairman to decide on all
 points at a glance._

 The Work is divided into different Sections, for the purpose of
 Consecutive Instruction as well as Ready Reference, and includes all
 Decisions and Rulings up to the present day.

  Paper covers                          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back           50 cts.


 Dick’s Ethiopian Scenes, Variety Sketches and Stump Speeches.
 Containing End-Men’s Jokes,

  _Negro Interludes and Farces_;
  _Fresh Dialogues for Interlocutor and Banjo_;
  _New Stump Speeches_;
  _Humorous Lectures_;
  _Dialect Sketches and Eccentricities_;
  _Dialogues and Repartee for Interlocutor and Bones_;
  _Quaint Burlesque Sermons_;
  _Jokes, Quips and Gags._

 It includes a number of Amusing Scenes and Negro Acts, and is full of
 the side-splitting vagaries of the best Minstrel Troupes in existence,
 besides a number of Original Recitations and Sketches in the Negro
 Dialect.

  178 pages, paper covers          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Dick’s Dutch, French and Yankee Dialect Recitations. An unsurpassed
 Collection of Droll Dutch Blunders, Frenchmen’s Funny Mistakes, and
 Ludicrous and Extravagant Yankee Yarns, each Recitation being in
 its own peculiar dialect. To those who make Dialect Recitations a
 speciality, this Collection will be of particular service, as it
 contains all the best pieces that are incidently scattered through
 a large number of volumes of  “Recitations and Readings,” besides
 several new and excellent sketches never before published.

  170 pages, paper cover            30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back       50 cts.


 Dick’s Irish Dialect Recitations. A carefully compiled Collection of
 Rare Irish Stories, Comic, Poetical and Prose Recitations, Humorous
 Letters and Funny Recitals, all told with the irresistible Humor of
 the Irish Dialect. This Collection contains, in addition to new and
 original pieces, all the very best Recitations in the Irish Dialect
 that can be gathered from a whole library of  “Recitation” books.

 It is full of the sparkling witticisms and queer conceits of the
 wittiest nation on earth, and apart from its special object, it
 furnishes a fund of the most entertaining matter for perusal in
 leisure moments.

  170 pages, paper cover               30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back          50 cts.


 Worcester’s Letter-Writer and Book of Business Forms for Ladies
 and Gentlemen. Containing Accurate Directions for Conducting
 Epistolary Correspondence, with 270 Specimen Letters, adapted to
 every Age and Situation in Life, and to Business Pursuits in General;
 with an Appendix comprising Forms for Wills, Petitions, Bills,
 Receipts, Drafts, Bills of Exchange, Promissory Notes, Executors’ and
 Administrators’ Accounts, etc., etc. The Orthography of the entire
 work is based on Worcester’s method, which is coming more and more
 into general use.

 This work is divided into two parts, the portion applicable to Ladies
 being kept distinct from the rest of the book, in order to provide
 better facilities for ready reference.

  216 pages. Bound in boards, cloth back         50 cts.


 Dick’s Hand-Book of Cribbage. Containing full directions for playing
 all the Varieties of the Game, and the Laws which govern them.
 This work is ENTIRELY NEW, and gives the correct method of playing
 the Six-Card, Five-Card, Two-Handed, Three-Handed, and Four-Handed
 Varieties of the Game, with instructive examples, showing clearly
 all the combinations of Hand, Crib, and Play, with a thorough
 investigation of long sequences in play, and the value of Hands. The
 Laws of the game have been carefully revised in accordance with the
 recognized usages of the present time, and constitute a reliable
 authority on all points of the Game.

  18 mo. Cloth, Flexible             50 cts.


 Dick’s Art of Gymnastics. Containing practical and progressive
 exercises applicable to all the principal apparatus of a
 well-appointed Gymnasium. Profusely illustrated. This work conveys
 plain and thorough instruction in the exercises and evolutions taught
 by the leading Professors of Gymnastics; so that proficiency may
 be attained, even without the aid of a Teacher. It also offers to
 Teachers a ready-arranged systematic course for their guidance.

  Artistically bound in cloth, 4to        $1 00

 Dick’s Dialogues and Monologues. Containing entirely original
 Dialogues, Monologues, Farces, etc., etc., expressly designed for
 parlor performance, full of humor and telling  “situations,” and
 requiring the least possible preparation of Costumes and Scenery to
 make them thoroughly effective.

  180 pages. 16 mo., paper cover          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back             50 cts.


 Dr. Valentine’s Comic Lectures; or, Morsels of Mirth for the
 Melancholy. A certain cure for the  “blues” and all other serious
 complaints. Containing Comic Lectures on Heads, Faces, Noses and
 Mouths; Comic Lectures on Animal Magnetism; Humorous Specimens of
 Stump Eloquence; Burlesque Specimens of Eloquence; Transactions of
 Learned Societies; Comical Delineation of Eccentric Characters;
 Amusing Colloquies and Monologues; Laughable Duologues and
 Characteristic Drolleries. Illustrated with twelve portraits of Dr.
 Valentine in his most celebrated characters. 192 pages. Paper cover.
 Price 30 cts.


 Mrs. Partington’s Carpet-Bag of Fun. Containing the Queer Sayings
 of Mrs. Partington, and the Funny Doings of her remarkable Son Isaac.
 Also the most amusing collection extant of Playful Puns, Phunny Poems,
 Pleasing Prose, Popular Parodies, and Political Pasquinades, Rhymes
 Without Reason and Reason Without Rhymes, Anecdotes, Conundrums,
 Anagrams, and, in fact, all other kinds of Grams. Illustrated with 100
 most amusing engravings, prepared expressly for this work from designs
 by the most eminent Comic Artists.

  Ornamented paper cover    30 cts.


 The Comical Doings of a Funny Man. Being the Scrapes and Adventures
 of a Practical Joker. Illustrated with Laughable Engravings. Octavo.

  Price        10 cts.


 Chips from Uncle Sam’s Jack-Knife. Illustrated with over 100 Comical
 Engravings, and comprising a collection of over 500 Laughable Stories,
 Funny Adventures, Comic Poetry, Queer Conundrums, Terrific Puns and
 Sentimental Sentences.

  Large octavo     25 cts.


 Fox’s Ethiopian Comicalities. Containing Strange Sayings, Eccentric
 Doings, Burlesque Speeches, Laughable Drolleries and Funny Stories, as
 recited by the celebrated Ethiopian Comedian.

  10 cts.


 Ned Turner’s Circus Joke Book. A collection of the best Jokes, Bon
 Mots, Repartees, Gems of Wit and Funny Sayings and Doings of the
 celebrated Equestrian Clown and Ethiopian Comedian, Ned Turner. 10
 cts.


 Ned Turner’s Black Jokes. A collection of Funny Stories, Jokes and
 Conundrums, interspersed with Witty Sayings and Humorous Dialogues, as
 given by Ned Turner, the celebrated Ethiopian Delineator

  10 cts.


 Ned Turner’s Clown Joke Book. Containing the best Jokes and Gems
 of Wit, composed and delivered by the favorite Equestrian Clown, Ned
 Turner. Selected and arranged by G. E. G.

  10 cts.


 Charley White’s Joke Book. Containing a full exposé of all the most
 Laughable Jokes, Witticisms, etc., as told by the celebrated Ethiopian
 Comedian, Charles White.

  10 cts.


 Black Wit and Darky Conversations. By Charles White. Containing a
 large collection of laughable Anecdotes, Jokes, Stories, Witticisms
 and Darky Conversations.

  10 cts.


 Yale College Scrapes; or, How the Boys Go it at New Haven. This is
 a book of 114 pages, containing accounts of all the famous  “Scrapes”
 and  “Sprees” of which Students of Old Yale have been guilty for the
 last quarter of a century.

  25 cts.


 How to Conduct a Debate. A Series of Complete Debates, Outlines of
 Debates and Questions for Discussion. In the complete debates, the
 questions for discussion are defined, the debate formally opened, an
 array of brilliant arguments adduced on either side, and the debate
 closed according to parliamentary usages. The second part consists of
 questions for debate, with heads of arguments, for and against, given
 in a condensed form, for the speakers to enlarge upon to suit their
 own fancy. In addition to these are a large collection of debatable
 questions. The authorities to be referred to for information being
 given at the close of every debate throughout the work. By F. Rowton.
 232 pages.

  Paper covers                     50 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      75 cts.


 The Amateur Trapper and Trap-Maker’s Guide. A complete and carefully
 prepared treatise on the art of Trapping, Snaring and Netting. This
 comprehensive work is embellished with fifty engraved illustrations;
 and these, together with the clear explanations which accompany them,
 will enable anybody of moderate comprehension to make and set any of
 the traps described. It also gives the baits usually employed by the
 most successful Hunters and Trappers, and exposes their secret methods
 of attracting and catching animals, birds, etc., with scarcely a
 possibility of failure.

  Large 16mo., paper covers          50 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back        75 cts.


 How to Write a Composition. The use of this excellent hand-book
 will save the student the many hours of labor too often wasted in
 trying to write a plain composition. It affords a perfect skeleton of
 one hundred and seventeen different subjects, with their headings or
 divisions clearly defined, and each heading filled in with the ideas
 which the subject suggests; so that all the writer has to do, in order
 to produce a good composition, is to enlarge on them to suit his taste
 and inclination.

  178 pages, paper covers          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Duncan’s Masonic Ritual and Monitor; _or, Guide to the Three
 Symbolic Degrees of the Ancient York Rite, Entered Apprentice,
 Fellow Craft and Master Mason_. And to the Degrees of Mark Master,
 Past Master, Most Excellent Master, and the Royal Arch. By Malcom
 C. Duncan. Explained and Interpreted by copious Notes and numerous
 Engravings. This is a valuable book for the Fraternity, containing, as
 it does, the Modern  “Work” of the order. No Mason should be without
 it.

  Bound in cloth                                         $2 50
  Leather tucks (pocket-book style), with gilt edges      3 00

 The Laws of Athletics. How to Preserve and Improve Health, Strength,
 and Beauty; and to Correct Personal Defects caused by Want of Physical
 Exercise. How to Train for Walking, Running, Rowing, etc., with the
 Systems of the Champion Athletes of the World. Including the Latest
 Laws of all Athletic Games and How to Play Them.

  By William Wood, Professor of Gymnastics. Paper cover     25 cts.
  Flexible cloth cover                                      50 cts.


 The Bartender’s Guide; or, How to Mix all Kinds of Fancy Drinks.
 Containing clear and reliable directions for mixing all the beverages
 used in the United States. Embracing Punches, Juleps, Cobblers,
 Cocktails, etc., etc., in endless variety. By Jerry Thomas.

  Illuminated paper covers      50 cts.
  Bound in full cloth           75 cts.


 Spayth’s Draughts or Checkers for Beginners. This treatise was
 written by Henry Spayth, the celebrated player, and is by far the most
 complete and instructive elementary work on Draughts ever published.

  Cloth, gilt side      75 cts.


 Dick’s Society Letter Writer for Ladies. Containing MORE THAN
 FIVE HUNDRED entirely Original Letters and Notes, with appropriate
 answers, on all subjects and occasions incident to life in Good
 Society; including specific instructions in all the details of
 a well-written letter, and General Hints for Conducting Polite
 Correspondence. Edited by Wm. B. Dick.

THE CONTENTS EMBRACE THE FOLLOWING SUBJECTS:

  _Hints on Letter Writing_
  _Letters of Introduction_
  _Answers to Letters of Introduction_
  _Letters and Notes of Invitation_
  _Forms of Cards_
  _Notes of Postponement_
  _Letters and Notes Accepting and Declining Invitations_
  _Letters of Apology_
  _Letters of Announcement_
  _Notes and Letters Accompanying Gifts_
  _Notes and Letters of Acknowledgment_
  _Notes and Letters Soliciting Favors_
  _Notes and Letters Offering Favors_
  _Notes and Letters Granting or Declining Favors_
  _Notes Soliciting Donations_
  _Notes and Letters Granting or Refusing Donations_
  _Letters of Congratulation_
  _Letters of Condolence_
  _Answers to Letters of Condolence_
  _Household Letters and Notes_
  _Forms of Household Orders_
  _Answers to Household Letters_
  _Business Letters and Notes_
  _Shopping by Mail_
  _Forms of Orders_
  _Miscellaneous Business Letters_
  _Family Letters_
  _Miscellaneous Notes and Letters_

 These new and Original Letters have been written expressly for this
 work in an easy and elegant style, furnishing excellent models which
 fulfill all the social, formal and business conditions that occur in
 the Correspondence of Ladies who move in refined society. There are
 many otherwise highly accomplished ladies who experience considerable
 difficulty in inditing a good letter, and frequently find themselves
 embarrassed from a want of facility in method of expression and proper
 form; to them this work is especially adapted, and will afford them
 valuable aid in rendering the task of correspondence easy and light.

  12mo., Cloth, Price      $1.25


 Dick’s Mysteries of the Hand; or, Palmistry made Easy. Translated,
 Abridged and Arranged from the French Works of Desbarrolles,
 D’Arpentigny and De Para d’Hermes. This book is a concise summary of
 the elaborate works of the above-named authorities on Palmistry.

 The various lines and mounts on the palm of the hand, and the typical
 formation of the hand and fingers are all clearly explained and
 illustrated by diagrams. The meaning to be deduced from the greater or
 less development of these mounts and lines (each of which has its own
 signification), also from the length, thickness and shape of the thumb
 and fingers, and from the mutual bearing they exercise on each other,
 is all distinctly explained.

 Complete facility for instant reference is insured by means of
 marginal notes by which any point of detail may be found and consulted
 at a glance.

 By means of this book the hitherto occult mystery of Palmistry is made
 simple and easy, and the whole Art may be acquired without difficulty
 or delay. It is emphatically Palmistry in a nutshell, and by its use,
 character and disposition can be discerned and probable future destiny
 foretold with surprising accuracy.

  Illuminated paper cover         50 cts.


 Dick’s Hand-Book of Whist. Containing Pole’s and Clay’s Rules for
 playing the modern scientific game; the Club Rules of Whist, and two
 interesting Double Dummy Problems. This is a thorough treatise on the
 game of Whist, taken from  “The American Hoyle” which is the standard
 authority. It covers all the points and intricacies which arise in the
 game; including the acknowledged code of etiquette observed by the
 players, with Drayson’s remarks on Trumps, their use and abuse, and
 all the modern methods of signalling between partners.

  Price        25 cts.


 The Amateur Printer; _or, Type-Setting at Home_. A thorough and
 complete instructor for the amateur in all the details of the
 Printer’s Art, giving practical information in regard to type, ink,
 paper and all the implements requisite, with illustrated directions
 for using them in a proper manner. It teaches how to set type in the
 stick, transfer the matter to the galley and make it up in forms; also
 how to take proofs and correct them, showing all the signs used by
 practical proof-readers in correcting proofs; it illustrates the plan
 of the type-case, showing the relative positions of the compartments
 allotted to the type of each letter, etc., and the correct manner of
 replacing or distributing type in the case. The practical instructions
 given in this work are complete and so plainly described that any
 amateur can become a good printer by studying and applying the
 information it contains. Paper covers.

  Price        25 cts.


 Talk of Uncle George to his Nephew About Draw Poker. Containing
 valuable suggestions in connection with this Great American Game;
 also instructions and directions to Clubs and Social Card Parties,
 whose members play only for recreation and pastime, with timely
 warnings to young players. Illustrated. In which Uncle George narrates
 to his nephew the experience he has gathered in the course of his
 travels West and East; showing him, in a chatty and familiar style,
 the devices, tricks, appliances, and advantages by which gentlemanly
 gamblers fleece the unsophisticated and unwary in the popular game of
 Draw Poker, and offering him plain and fatherly advice as to the best
 means for frustrating their efforts and avoiding their traps. Every
 one who takes a hand at  “Draw” will be a gainer by perusing what
 Uncle George says about it, and become a wiser as well as a richer
 man. Quarto. Paper. Price 25 cts.


 Proctor on Draw-Poker. A Critical Dissertation on  “Poker Principles
 and Chance Laws.” By Prof. RICHARD A. PROCTOR. An interesting Treatise
 on the Laws and Usages which govern the Game of Draw-Poker, with
 Practical Remarks upon the Chances and Probabilities of the Game,
 and a Critical Analysis of the Theories and Statistics advanced by
 Blackbridge and other writers on the subject, and especially in regard
 to their doctrines relating to cumulative recurrences.

  Small quarto       15 cts.


 Lander’s Revised Work of Odd-Fellowship. Containing all the
 Lectures, complete, with Regulations for Opening, Conducting, and
 Closing a Lodge; together with Forms of Initiation, Charges of the
 Various Officers, etc., with the Complete work in the following
 Degrees: Initiation; First, or Pink Degree; Second, or Royal Blue
 Degree; Third, or Scarlet Degree. By EDWIN F. LANDER. This hand-book
 of the Revised Work of the Independent Order of Odd-Fellowship has
 been prepared in conformity with the amendments and alterations
 adopted by the Sovereign Grand Lodge of Canada in September, 1880.
 16mo., paper cover, 25 cts.


 The Jolly Joker; or, a Laugh all Round. An Immense Collection of the
 Funniest Jokes, Drollest Anecdotes and most Side-Splitting Oddities in
 existence, profusely illustrated from beginning to end, in the most
 mirth-provoking style. The illustrations alone are sufficient for a
 constant and long-sustained series of good, square laughs for all time.

  12mo., 144 pages, illustrated cover        25 cts.


 Some Comicalities. A Whole Volume of Jolly Jokes, Quaint Anecdotes,
 Funny Stories, Brilliant Witticisms, and Crushing Conundrums, with as
 many droll illustrations to the page—and every page at that—as can be
 crowded into it. 144 pages.

  Illustrated cover       25 cts.


 McBride’s New Dialogues. Especially designed for School and
 Literary Amateur Entertainments; containing entirely New and Original
 Dialogues, introducing Irish, Yankee, and other eccentric characters.
 By H. ELLIOTT MCBRIDE.

CONTENTS.

  _A Happy Woman._
  _The Somnambulist._
  _Those Thompsons._
  _Playing School._
  _Tom and Sally._
  _Assisting Hezekiah._
  _A Visit to the Oil Regions._
  _Breaking up the Exhibition._
  _Turning Around._
  _A Little Boy’s Debate._
  _The Silver Lining._
  _Restraining Jotham._
  _A Shoemaker’s Troubles._
  _An Uncomfortable Predicament._
  _The Opening Speech._
  _The Cucumber Hill Debating Club._
  _Married by the New Justice._
  _Bread on the Waters._
  _An Unsuccessful Advance._
  _When Women Have Their Rights._
  _Only Another Footprint._
  _Rosabella’s Lovers._
  _A Smart Boy._
  _A Heavy Shower._
  _Master of the Situation._

 The marked favor with which the four preceding volumes have been
 received suggested the necessity for an increased variety of new
 eccentric and characteristic pieces, to form an addition to the
 repertoire contained in  “McBride’s Comic Dialogues,”  “McBride’s All
 Kinds of Dialogues,”  “McBride’s Humorous Dialogues,” and  “McBride’s
 Temperance Dialogues.” They are all written with a view to develop
 dramatic talent, and abound in quaint humor, Dialect Drolleries, and
 telling stage  “situations.”

  16mo., 178 pages, illuminated paper cover      30 cts.
  Bound in boards                                50 cts.


 Dick’s Book of Toasts, Speeches and Responses. Containing Toasts and
 Sentiments for Public and Social Occasions, and specimen Speeches with
 appropriate replies suitable for the following occasions:

_Public Dinners_, _Social Dinners_, _Convivial Gatherings_, _Art and
Professional Banquets_, _Manufacturers’ Meetings_, _Agricultural
and Commercial Festivals_, _Special Toasts for Ladies_, _Christmas,
Thanksgiving and other Festivals_, _Friendly Meetings_, _Weddings
and their Anniversaries_, _Army and Navy Banquets_, _Patriotic and
Political Occasions_, _Trades’ Unions and Dinners_, _Benedicts’ and
Bachelors’ Banquets_, _Masonic Celebrations_, _Sporting Coteries_, _All
Kinds of Occasions._

 This work includes an instructive dissertation on the Art of making
 amusing After-dinner Speeches, giving hints and directions by the
 aid of which persons with only ordinary intelligence can make an
 entertaining and telling speech. Also, Correct Rules and Advice for
 Presiding at Table.

 The use of this work will render a poor and diffident speaker fluent
 and witty—and a good speaker better and wittier, besides affording
 an immense fund of anecdotes, wit and wisdom, and other serviceable
 matter to draw upon at will. Paper covers.

  Price      30 cts.


 How Boggins Was Cured. An intensely ludicrous sketch, pictorially
 expressed; showing how Mr. Boggins, who had been reduced to a
 despairingly crippled state by rheumatism and a complication of
 other causes, was induced to submit to the wonderful effects of a
 course of dynamo-electro magnetic therapeutics, tracing the magical
 and potent effects of the treatment, and the heroic efforts he made
 while submitting to the doctor’s system of pathology; until, crowned
 with complete success, he is able to throw aside his crutches and is
 restored to perfect health and pristine agility. An entirely new and
 original series of sketches. Funny! is no name for it. Small quarto.

  Illustrated       10 cts.


 Dick’s Games of Patience; or Solitaire with Cards. New and Revised
 Edition. Containing Sixty-four Games. Illustrated with Fifty
 explanatory full-page Tableaux. This treatise on Solitaire, a pastime
 which is steadily gaining in popularity, embraces a number of new and
 original Games, and all the Games of Patience at present in favor with
 the most experienced players. This comprehensive work contains the
 following Games:

  _Auld Lang Syne._
  _Tam O’Shanter._
  _The Four Seasons._
  _Simplicity._
  _The Gathering of the Clans._
  _Napoleon at St. Helena._
  _The Calculation._
  _The Surprise Party._
  _The Four Kings._
  _The Clock._
  _The Garden._
  _The Queen’s Audience._
  _The Phalanx._
  _The Idle Year._
  _The Chameleon._
  _La Belle Lucie._
  _The Shamrocks._
  _The House in the Wood._
  _The House on the Hill._
  _The Grand Duchess._
  _The Constitution._
  _The Beleaguered Castle._
  _The Citadel._
  _The Exiled Kings._
  _Penelope’s Web._
  _Napoleon’s Square._
  _The Court Yard._
  _The Windmill._
  _Leoni’s Own._
  _La Nivernaise._
  _The Four Corners._
  _The Baker’s Dozen._
  _The Salic Law._
  _The Sultan of Turkey._
  _The Fortress._
  _The Hemispheres._
  _The Elevens._
  _The Chester Game._
  _The Shah of Persia._
  _The Empress of India._
  _The Zodiac._
  _The Blockade._
  _The Besieged City._
  _The Fourteens._
  _Napoleon’s Favorite._
  _The Fifteen Puzzle._
  _The Contra-Dance._
  _The Betrothal._
  _The Reinforcements._
  _The Reserve._
  _The Frog._
  _The Pyramid._
  _The Quadrille._
  _The Chatelaine._
  _The Order of Precedence._
  _The Congress._
  _Thirteen Down._
  _The Octagon._
  _Light and Shade._
  _St. Louis._
  _Rouge et Noir._
  _The Blondes and Brunettes._
  _The Royal Cotillion._
  _Nestor._

 Each game is carefully and lucidly described, with the distinctive
 rules to be observed and hints as to the best means of success in
 play. The Tableaux furnish efficient aid in rendering the disposition
 of the cards necessary to each game plain and easily comprehensible.
 The difficulty usually attending descriptions of intricate games is
 reduced, as far as possible, by precision in method and terseness of
 expression in the text, and the illustrations serve to dispel any
 possible ambiguity that might be unavoidable without their aid. The
 work is attractive in style and elegant in execution, and will prove
 an interesting companion for many a solitary hour. Quarto. 143 pages.

  Board cover      75 cts.
  Cloth             $1 00.


 Dick’s Parlor Exhibitions, and How to Make them Successful.
 Containing complete and detailed directions for preparing and
 arranging Parlor Exhibitions and Amateur Performances. It includes:

  _Tableaux Vivants._
  _Living Portraits._
  _Living Statuary._
  _Dame History’s Peep Show._
  _Shadow Pantomimes._
  _Popular Ballads illustrated by appropriate action._
  _Charades of all kinds._
  _Parlor Pantomimes._
  _Punch and Judy._

AND FIFTY OTHER DIVERTING PARLOR PASTIMES AND AMUSEMENTS.

 It contains also a full Catalogue of the celebrated  “ART EXHIBITION,”
 and a practical treatise on the wonderful SCIENCE OF SECOND-SIGHT,
 by the aid of which all the startling effects and achievements of
 second-sight may be performed by any one possessing a tolerable
 retentive memory.

 This work is thoroughly practical and gives the fullest instructions
 for preparing and lighting the stage, the construction of the FRAMES
 FOR LIVING PORTRAITS, and shows how each performance can be presented
 with complete success. It is illustrated with numerous engravings
 explaining the text.

  150 pages, paper cover         30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back    50 cts.


 Barber’s American Book of Ready-Made Speeches. Containing 159
 original examples of Humorous and Serious Speeches, suitable for every
 possible occasion where a speech may be called for, together with
 appropriate replies to each. Including:

  _Presentation Speeches._
  _Convivial Speeches._
  _Festival Speeches._
  _Addresses of Congratulation._
  _Addresses of Welcome._
  _Addresses of Compliment._
  _Political Speeches._
  _Dinner and Supper Speeches for Clubs, etc._
  _Off-Hand Speeches on a Variety of Subjects._
  _Miscellaneous Speeches._
  _Toasts and Sentiments for Public and Private Entertainments._
  _Preambles and Resolutions of Congratulation, Compliment and Condolence._

 With this book any person may prepare himself to make a neat little
 speech, or reply to one when called upon to do so. They are all short,
 appropriate and witty, and even ready speakers may profit by them.

  Paper                              50 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back        75 cts.


 Day’s American Ready-Reckoner. By B. H. Day. This Ready-Reckoner
 is composed of Original Tables, which are positively correct, having
 been revised in the most careful manner. It is a book of 192 pages,
 and embraces more matter than 500 pages of any other Reckoner. It
 contains: Tables for Rapid Calculations of Aggregate Values, Wages,
 Salaries, Board, Interest Money, etc.; Tables of Timber and Plank
 Measurement; Tables of Board and Log Measurement, and a great variety
 of Tables and useful calculations which it would be impossible
 to enumerate in an advertisement of this limited space. All the
 information in this valuable book is given in a simple manner, and is
 made so plain, that any person can use it at once without any previous
 study or loss of time.

  Bound in boards, with cloth back     50 cts.
  Bound in cloth, gilt back            75 cts.


 The Art and Etiquette of Making Love. A Manual of Love, Courtship
 and Matrimony. It tells

  _How to cure bashfulness_,
  _How to commence a courtship_,
  _How to please a sweetheart or lover_,
  _How to write a love-letter_,
  _How to  “pop the question,”_
  _How to act before and after a proposal_,
  _How to accept or reject a proposal_,
  _How to break off an engagement_,
  _How to act after an engagement_,
  _How to act as bridesmaid or grooms-man_,
  _How the etiquette of a wedding and the after reception should be
     observed_.

 And, in fact, how to fulfill every duty and meet every contingency
 connected with courtship and matrimony. 176 pages.

  Paper covers                    30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back     50 cts.


 Frank Converse’s Complete Banjo Instructor Without a Master.
 Containing a choice collection of Banjo Solos and Hornpipes, Walk
 Arounds, Reels and Jigs, Songs and Banjo Stories, progressively
 arranged and plainly explained, enabling the learner to become a
 proficient banjoist without the aid of a teacher. The necessary
 explanations accompany each tune, and are placed under the notes on
 each page, plainly showing the string required, the finger to be used
 for stopping it, the manner of striking, and the number of times it
 must be sounded. The Instructor is illustrated with diagrams and
 explanatory symbols. 100 pages. Bound in boards, cloth back.

  50 cts.


 Hard Words Made Easy. Rules for Pronunciation and Accent; with
 instructions how to pronounce French, Italian, German, Spanish, and
 other foreign names.

  12 cts.


 Rarey & Knowlson’s Complete Horse Tamer and Farrier. A New and
 Improved Edition, containing: Mr. Rarey’s Whole Secret of Subduing and
 Breaking Vicious Horses; His Improved Plan of Managing Young Colts,
 and Breaking them to the Saddle, to Harness and the Sulky. Rules for
 Selecting a Good Horse, and for Feeding Horses. Also the Complete
 Farrier or Horse Doctor; being the result of fifty years’ extensive
 practice of the author, John C. Knowlson, during his life an English
 Farrier of high popularity; containing the latest discoveries in the
 cure of Spavin. Illustrated with descriptive engravings. Bound in
 boards, cloth back 50 cts.


 How to Amuse an Evening Party. A Complete collection of Home
 Recreations. Profusely Illustrated with over Two Hundred fine
 wood-cuts, containing Round Games and Forfeit Games, Parlor Magic
 and Curious Puzzles, Comic Diversions and Parlor Tricks, Scientific
 Recreations and Evening Amusements. A young man with this volume
 may render himself the _beau ideal_ of a delightful companion at
 every party, and win the hearts of all the ladies, by his powers of
 entertainment.

  Bound in ornamental paper covers     30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with, cloth back    50 cts.


 Frost’s Laws and By-Laws of American Society. A Complete Treatise
 on Etiquette. Containing plain and Reliable Directions for Deportment
 in every Situation in Life, by S. A. Frost, author of  “Frost’s
 Letter-Writer,” etc. This is a book of ready reference on the usages
 of Society at all times and on all occasions, and also a reliable
 guide in the details of deportment and polite behavior.

  Paper covers                         30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back     50 cts.


 Frost’s Original Letter-Writer. A complete collection of Original
 Letters and Notes, upon every imaginable subject of Every-Day Life,
 with plain directions about everything connected with writing a
 letter. By S. A. Frost. To which is added a comprehensive Table of
 Synonyms, alone worth double the price asked for the book. We assure
 our readers that it is the best collection of letters ever published
 in this country; they are written in plain and natural language, and
 elegant in style without being high-flown.

  Bound in boards, cloth back, with illuminated sides      50 cts.


 North’s Book of Love-Letters. With directions how to write and
 when to use them, and 120 Specimen Letters, suitable for Lovers of
 any age and condition, and under all circumstances. Interspersed
 with the author’s comments thereon. The whole forming a convenient
 Hand-book of valuable information and counsel for the use of those who
 need friendly guidance and advice in matters of Love, Courtship and
 Marriage. By Ingoldsby North.

  Bound in boards     50 cts.
  Bound in cloth      75 cts.


 How to Shine in Society; or, The Science of Conversation. Containing
 the principles, laws and general usages of polite society, including
 easily applied hints and directions for commencing and sustaining an
 agreeable conversation, and for choosing topics appropriate to the
 time, place and company, thus affording immense assistance to the
 bashful and diffident. 16mo.

  Paper covers      25 cts.


 The Poet’s Companion. A Dictionary of all Allowable Rhymes in the
 English Language. This gives the Perfect, the Imperfect and Allowable
 Rhymes, and will enable you to ascertain to a certainty whether any
 word can be mated. It is invaluable to any one who desires to court
 the Muses, and is used by some of the best writers in the country

  25 cts.


 Mind Your Stops. Punctuation made plain, and Composition simplified
 for Readers, Writers and Talkers

  12 cts.


 Five Hundred French Phrases. A book giving all the French words and
 maxims in general use in writing the English language

  12 cts.


 Steele’s Exhibition Dialogues. A Collection of Dramatic Dialogues
 and easy Plays, excellently adapted for Amateurs in Parlor and
 Exhibition Performances; with Hints and instructions relative to
 management, arrangements and other details necessary to render them
 successful. By Silas S. Steele.


CONTENTS.

  _The Stage-Struck Clerk. For 6 Males and 3 Females._
  _The Tailor of Tipperary. For 7 Males and 4 Females._
  _Opera Mad. For 7 Males and 1 Female._
  _The Painter’s Studio. Portrait Sketch. For 2 Males._
  _The Well of Death. For 2 males._
  _Blanche of Devan. For 3 Males and 1 Female._
  _The Youth Who Never Saw a Woman. For 3 Males and 1 Female._
  _The Masked Ball. For 3 Males and 2 Females._
  _The Hypochondriac. For 4 Males and 1 Female._
  _Two Families in One Room. For 4 Males and 2 Females._
  _The Country Cousin. For 4 Males and 2 Females._
  _The Carpenter and his Apprentice. For 8 Males._
  _The Yankee Tar’s Return. For 5 Males and 1 Female._
  _The Lawyer, Doctor, Soldier and Actor. For 3 Males._
  _The Children in the Wood. For 6 Males and 4 Females._
  _The Wizard’s Warning. For 2 Males._

  Paper covers. Price             30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back     50 cts.


 Kavanaugh’s Humorous Dramas for School Exhibitions and Private
 Theatricals. Consisting of short and easy Dramatic Pieces, suitable
 for Amateur Exhibitions. By Mrs. Russell Kavanaugh, author of  “The
 Juvenile Speaker.”

       CONTENTS.          Boys. Girls.
  Eh! What is it?         | 3  |  2 |
  That Awful Girl         | 5  |  5 |
  The Lady Killer         | 2  |  1 |
  How I Made My Fortune   | 6  |    |
  A Cure for Obstinancy   | 3  |  9 |
  Aunt Jerusha’s Mistake  | 2  |  2 |
  A Fair Fight            | 4  |  4 |
  Between Two Stools      | 2  |  3 |
  The Pet of the School   | 8  |  3 |
  Maud May’s Lovers       | 8  |  2 |
  The Heiress’ Ruse       | 4  |  4 |
  The Cardinal’s Godson   | 6  |  1 |

 The foregoing collection of Dramas are all original, and were written
 expressly for School and Parlor performance.

  Bound in boards    50 cts.
  Paper covers       30 cts.


 Dick’s One Hundred Amusements for Evening Parties, Picnics and Social
 Gatherings. This book is full of Original Novelties. It contains:

 _New and Attractive Games, clearly illustrated by means of Witty
 Examples, showing how each may be most successfully played._

 _Surpassing Tricks, easy of performance._

 _Musical and other innocent sells._

 _A variety of new and ingenious puzzles._

 _Comical illusions, fully described. These surprising and grotesque
 illusions are very startling in their effects, and present little or
 no difficulty in their preparation._

ALSO AN ENTIRELY NEW VERSION OF THE CELEBRATED  “MRS. JARLEY’S WAX
WORKS.”

The whole being illustrated by sixty fine wood engravings.

  Illuminated paper covers              30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back      50 cts.


 Madame Le Normand’s Fortune Teller. An entertaining book, said to
 have been written by Madame Le Normand, the celebrated French Fortune
 Teller, who was frequently consulted by the Emperor Napoleon. A party
 of ladies and gentlemen may amuse themselves for hours with this
 curious book. It tells fortunes by  “The Chart of Fate” (a large
 lithographic chart), and gives 624 answers to questions on every
 imaginable subject that may happen in the future. It explains a
 variety of ways for telling fortunes by Cards and Dice; gives a list
 of 79 curious old superstitions and omens, and 187 weather omens, and
 winds up with the celebrated Oraculum of Napoleon. We will not endorse
 this book as infallible; but we assure our readers that it is the
 source of much mirth whenever introduced at a gathering of ladies and
 gentlemen. Bound in boards. 40 cts.


 The Fireside Magician; or, The Art of Natural Magic Made Easy.
 Being a scientific explanation of Legerdemain, Physical Amusement,
 Recreative Chemistry, Diversion with Cards, and of all the mysteries
 of Mechanical Magic, with feats as performed by Herr Alexander, Robert
 Heller, Robert Houdin,  “The Wizard of the North,” and distinguished
 conjurors—comprising two hundred and fifty interesting mental and
 physical recreations, with explanatory engravings.

  132 pages, paper                 30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Howard’s Book of Conundrums and Riddles. Containing over 1,200
 of the best Conundrums, Riddles, Enigmas, Ingenious Catches and
 Amusing Sells ever invented. This splendid collection of curious
 paradoxes will afford the material for a never-ending feast of fun and
 amusement. Any person, with the assistance of this book, may take the
 lead in entertaining a company, and keep them in roars of laughter for
 hours together.

  Paper covers                      30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back       50 cts.


 The Parlor Magician; or, One Hundred Tricks for the Drawing-Room.
 Containing an extensive and miscellaneous collection of Conjuring
 and Legerdemain, embracing: Tricks with Dice, Dominoes and Cards;
 Tricks with Ribbons, Rings and Fruit; Tricks with Coin, Handkerchiefs
 and Balls, etc. The whole illustrated and clearly explained with 121
 engravings.

  Paper covers                          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back      50 cts.


 Book of Riddles and 500 Home Amusements. Containing a curious
 collection of Riddles, Charades and Enigmas; Rebuses, Anagrams and
 Transpositions; Conundrums and Amusing Puzzles; Recreations in
 Arithmetic, and Queer Sleights, and numerous other Entertaining
 Amusements. Illustrated with 60 engravings.

  Paper covers                         30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back     50 cts.


 The Book of Fireside Games. Containing an explanation of a variety
 of Witty, Rollicking, Entertaining and Innocent Games and Amusing
 Forfeits, suited to the Family Circle as a Recreation. This book is
 just the thing for social gatherings, parties and pic-nics.

  Paper covers                    30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back     50 cts.


 The Book of 500 Curious Puzzles. Containing a large collection of
 Curious Puzzles, Entertaining Paradoxes, Perplexing Deceptions in
 Numbers, Amusing Tricks in Geometry; illustrated with a great variety
 of Engravings.

  Paper covers                          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back      50 cts.


 Parlor Tricks with Cards. Containing explanations of all the Tricks
 and Deceptions with Playing Cards ever invented. The whole illustrated
 and made plain and easy with 70 engravings.

  Paper covers                          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back      50 cts.


 Day’s Book-Keeping Without a Master. Containing the Rudiments of
 Book-keeping in Single and Double Entry, together with the proper
 Forms and Rules for opening and keeping condensed and general Book
 Accounts. This work is printed in a beautiful script type, and hence
 combines the advantages of a handsome style of writing with its very
 simple and easily understood lessons in Book-keeping. The several
 pages have explanations at the bottom to assist the learner, in
 small type. As a pattern for opening book accounts it is especially
 valuable—particularly for those who are not well posted in the art.
 DAY’S BOOK-KEEPING is the size of a regular quarto Account Book, and
 is made to lie flat open for convenience in use

  50 cts.


 The Young Reporter; or, how to Write Shorthand. A Complete
 Phonographic Teacher, intended as a School-book, to afford thorough
 instructions to those who have not the assistance of an Oral Teacher.
 By the aid of this work, and the explanatory examples which are given
 as practical exercises, any person of the most ordinary intelligence
 may learn to write Shorthand, and report Speeches and Sermons in a
 short time.

  Bound in boards, with cloth back                 50 cts.


 How to Learn the Sense of 3,000 French Words in one Hour. This
 ingenious little book actually accomplishes all that its title claims.
 It is a fact that there are at least three thousand words in the
 French language, forming a large proportion of those used in ordinary
 conversation, which are spelled exactly the same as in English, or
 become the same by very slight and easily understood changes in their
 termination.

  16mo., illuminated paper covers             25 cts.


 How to Speak in Public; or, The Art of Extempore Oratory. A
 valuable manual for those who desire to become ready off-hand
 speakers; containing clear directions how to arrange ideas logically
 and quickly, including illustrations, by the analysis of speeches
 delivered by some of the greatest orators, exemplifying the importance
 of correct emphasis, clearness of articulation, and appropriate
 gesture.

  Paper covers         25 cts.


 Live and Learn. A guide for all those who to speak and write
 correctly; particularly intended as a Book of Reference for the
 solution of difficulties connected with Grammar, Composition,
 Punctuation, &c., &c., containing examples of 1,000 mistakes of daily
 occurrence in speaking, writing and pronunciation.

  Paper, 16mo., 216 pages            30 cts.


 The Art of Dressing Well. By Miss S. A. Frost. This book is designed
 for ladies and gentlemen who desire to make a favorable impression
 upon society.

  Paper covers                        30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back         50 cts.


 Thimm’s French Self-Taught. A new system, on the most simple
 principles, for Universal Self-Tuition, with English pronunciation
 of every word. By this system the acquirement of the French Language
 is rendered less laborious and more thorough than by any of the old
 methods.

  By Franz Thimm       25 cts.


 Thimm’s German Self-Taught. Uniform with  “French Self-Taught,” and
 arranged in accordance with the same principles of thoroughness and
 simplicity.

  By Franz Thimm        25 cts.


 Thimm’s Spanish Self-Taught. A book of self-instruction in the
 Spanish Language, arranged according to the same method as the
  “French” and  “German,” by the same author, and uniform with them in
 size.

  By Franz Thimm         25 cts.


 Thimm’s Italian Self-Taught. Uniform in style and size with the
 three foregoing books.

  By Franz Thimm          25 cts.


 Martine’s Sensible Letter-Writer. Being a comprehensive and complete
 Guide and Assistant for those who desire to carry on Epistolary
 Correspondence; containing a large collection of model letters on the
 simplest matters of life, adapted to all ages and conditions—


 EMBRACING,

 _Business Letters_;

 _Applications for Employment, with Letters of Recommendation and
 Answers to Advertisements_;

 _Letters between Parents and Children_;

 _Letters of Friendly Counsel and Remonstrance_;

 _Letters soliciting Advice, Assistance and Friendly Favors_;

 _Letters of Courtesy, Friendship and Affection_;

 _Letters of Condolence and Sympathy_;

 _A Choice Collection of Love-Letters, for Every Situation in a
 Courtship_;

 _Notes of Ceremony, Familiar Invitations, etc., together with Notes of
 Acceptance and Regret._

 The whole containing 300 Sensible Letters and Notes. This is an
 invaluable book for those persons who have not had sufficient practice
 to enable them to write letters without great effort. It contains such
 a variety of letters, that models may be found to suit every subject.

  207 pages, bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.
  Bound in cloth                              75 cts.


 Martine’s Hand-Book of Etiquette and Guide to True Politeness. A
 complete Manual for all those who desire to understand good breeding,
 the customs of good society, and to avoid incorrect and vulgar habits.
 Containing clear and comprehensive directions for correct manners,
 conversation, dress, introductions, rules for good behavior at Dinner
 Parties and the Table, with hints on carving and wine at table;
 together with the Etiquette of the Ball and Assembly Room, Evening
 Parties, and the usages to be observed when visiting or receiving
 calls; Deportment in the street and when traveling. To which is added
 the Etiquette of Courtship, Marriage, Domestic Duties and fifty-six
 rules to be observed in general society. By Arthur Martine.

  Bound in boards                  50 cts.
  Bound in cloth, gilt sides       75 cts.


 Dick’s Quadrille Call-Book and Ball-Room Prompter. Containing clear
 directions how to call out the figures of every dance, with the
 quantity of music necessary for each figure, and simple explanations
 of all the figures which occur in Plain and Fancy Quadrilles. This
 book gives plain and comprehensive instructions how to dance all the
 new and popular dances, fully describing

  _The Opening March or Polonaise_,
  _Various Plain and Fancy Quadrilles_,
  _Waltz and Glide Quadrilles_,
  _Plain Lancers and Caledonians_,
  _Glide Lancers and Caledonians_,
  _Saratoga Lancers_,
  _The Parisian Varieties_,
  _The Prince Imperial Set_,
  _Social and Basket Quadrilles_,
  _Nine-Pin and Star Quadrilles_,
  _Gavotte and Minuet Quadrilles_,
  _March and Cheat Quadrilles_,
  _Favorite Jigs and Contra-Dances_,
  _Polka and Polka Redowa_,
  _Redowa and Redowa Waltz_,
  _Polka Mazourka and Old Style Waltz_,
  _Modern Plain Waltz and Glide_,
  _Boston Dip and Hop Waltz_,
  _Five-Step Waltz and Schottische_,
  _Varsovienne and Zulma L’Orientale_,
  _Galop and Deux Temps_,
  _Esmeralda, Sicilienne, Danish Dance_,

AND OVER ONE HUNDRED FIGURES FOR THE  “GERMAN;”

 To which is added a Sensible Guide to Etiquette and Proper Deportment
 in the Ball and Assembly Room, besides seventy pages of dance music
 for the piano.

  Paper covers           50 cts.
  Bound in boards        75 cts.


 Odell’s System of Short-Hand. (Taylor Improved.) By which the
 method of taking down sermons, lectures, trials, speeches, etc., may
 be easily acquired, without the aid of a master. With a supplement
 containing exercises and other useful information for the use of
 those who wish to perfect themselves in the art of stenography. The
 instructions given in this book are on the inductive principle: first
 showing the learner how to get accustomed to the contracted form of
 spelling words, and then substituting the stenographic characters for
 the contractions. By this plan the difficulties of mastering this
 useful art are very much lessened, and the time required to attain
 proficiency reduced to the least possible limits.

  Small quarto, paper cover    25 cts.


 Alice in Wonderland, and other Fairy Plays for Children. Consisting
 of Four Juvenile Dramas, the first of which is a faithful Dramatic
 Version of Mr. Lewis Carroll’s well-known  “Alice in Wonderland;” and
 all combining, in the happiest manner, light comedy, burlesque, and
 extravaganza. By Kate Freiligrath-Kroeker. These plays are written in
 a style of quaint, childish simplicity, but embody a brilliant vein of
 wit and humor. The music of all the songs introduced is given, thus
 rendering each drama complete in all respects.

  143 pages, illuminated paper cover    30 cts.
  Bound in boards                       50 cts.


 The American Housewife and Kitchen Directory. This valuable book
 embraces three hundred and seventy-eight recipes for cooking all sorts
 of American dishes in the most economical manner; it also contains
 a variety of important secrets for washing, cleaning, scouring and
 extracting grease, paint, stains and iron-mould from cloth, muslin and
 linen.

  Bound in ornamental paper covers       30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back       50 cts.


 The American Card Player. An entirely new edition, containing all
 the improvements, latest decisions, and modern methods of playing
 the games of Whist, Euchre, Cribbage, Bézique, Sixty-six, Penuchle,
 Cassino, Draw Poker, and All Fours, in exact accordance with the best
 authorities, with all the accepted varieties of these popular games.

  150 pages, bound in boards, cloth back     50 cts.


 Draiper’s Six Hundred Ways to Make Money. A reliable Compendium of
 valuable Receipts for making articles in constant demand and of ready
 sale, carefully selected from private sources and the best established
 authorities. By Edmund S. Draiper, Professor of Analytical Chemistry,
 etc. This Collection of Receipts is undoubtedly the most valuable and
 comprehensive that has ever been offered to the public in so cheap a
 form.

  144 pages, paper cover       30 cts.


 The Language of Flowers. A complete dictionary of the Language
 of Flowers, and the sentiments which they express. Well arranged
 and comprehensive in every detail. All unnecessary matter has been
 omitted. This little volume is destined to fill a want long felt for a
 reliable book at a price within the reach of all.

  Paper    15 cts.


 Chilton’s One Thousand Secrets and Wrinkles. A book of hints and
 helps for every-day emergencies. Containing 1,000 useful hints and
 receipts. No family should be without this little storehouse of
 valuable information.

  Paper covers    30 cts.


 The Ladies’ Love Oracle. A Complete Fortune Teller of all questions
 upon Love, Courtship and Matrimony.

  30 cts.


 Trumps’ American Hoyle; or, Gentleman’s Hand-book of Games.
 Containing all the games played in the United States, with rules,
 descriptions and technicalities, adapted to the American method of
 playing. By TRUMPS. Thirteenth edition; illustrated with numerous
 diagrams. This work is designed and acknowledged as an authority on
 all games as played in America, being a guide to the correct methods
 of playing and an arbiter on all disputed points. In each of the
 previous editions the work was subjected to careful revision and
 correction; but this, the THIRTEENTH EDITION, IS ENTIRELY NEW, and
 re-written from the latest reliable sources. It includes an exhaustive
 treatise on Whist, with all the latest essays on the modern game, by
 Clay, Pole, Drayson, &c., &c. Also, a lucid description of all the
 games now in vogue in America, with the laws that govern them, revised
 and corrected to conform to present usages, and embraces an elaborate
 and practical analysis of the Doctrine of Chances. 12mo., cloth, 536
 pages.

  Price      $2.00

 Dick’s Games of Patience; _or, Solitaire with Cards_. Containing
 Forty-three Games. Illustrated with Thirty-three explanatory full-page
 Tableaux. This treatise on Solitaire, a pastime which is steadily
 gaining in popularity, embraces a number of new and original Games,
 and all the Games of Patience at present in favor with the most
 experienced players. Each game is carefully and lucidly described,
 with the distinctive rules to be observed and hints as to the
 best means of success in play. The Tableaux furnish efficient aid
 in rendering the disposition of the cards necessary to each game
 plain and easily comprehensible. The difficulty usually attending
 descriptions of intricate games is reduced, as far as possible, by
 precision in method and terseness of expression in the text, and the
 illustrations serve to dispel any possible ambiguity that might be
 unavoidable without their aid. The work is attractive in style and
 will prove an interesting companion for many a solitary hour. Quarto.
 Illustrated.

  Paper cover      75 cts.
  Cloth              $1.00

 Blackbridge’s Complete Poker Player. A Practical Guidebook to the
 American National Game; containing mathematical and experimental
 analyses of the probabilities of Draw Poker. By JOHN BLACKBRIDGE,
 Actuary. This, as its title implies, is an exhaustive treatise on Draw
 Poker, giving minute and detailed information on the various chances,
 expectations, possibilities and probabilities that can occur in all
 stages of the game, with directions and advice for successful play,
 deduced from actual practice and experience, and founded on precise
 mathematical data.

  Small quarto, 142 pages, paper     50 cts.
  Bound in full cloth                  $1.00

 The Modern Pocket Hoyle. By  “Trumps.” Containing all the games of
 skill and chance, as played in this country at the present time, being
 an  “authority on all disputed points.” This valuable manual is all
 original, or thoroughly revised from the best and latest authorities,
 and includes the laws and complete directions for playing one hundred
 and eleven different games.

  388 pages, paper covers               50 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth backs     75 cts.


 Hoyle’s Games. A complete Manual of the laws that govern all games
 of skill and chance, including Card Games, Chess, Checkers, Dominoes,
 Backgammon, Dice, Billiards, as played in this country at the present
 time, and all Field Games. Entirely original, or thoroughly revised
 from the latest and best American authorities.

  Paper covers       50 cts.
  Boards             75 cts.




CHECKERS AND CHESS.


 Spayth’s American Draught Player; or, The Theory and Practice of
 the Scientific Game of Checkers. Simplified and Illustrated with
 Practical Diagrams. Containing upwards of 1,700 Games and Positions.
 By Henry Spayth. Sixth edition, with over three hundred Corrections
 and Improvements. Containing: The Standard Laws of the Game—Full
 instructions—Draught Board Numbered—Names of the Games, and how
 formed—The  “Theory of the Move and its Changes” practically explained
 and illustrated with Diagrams—Playing Tables for Draught Clubs—New
 Systems of numbering the Board—Prefixing signs to the Variations—List
 of Draught Treatises and Publications chronologically arranged.

  Bound in cloth, gilt side and back    $3.00

 Spayth’s Game of Draughts. By Henry Spayth. This book is designed
 as a supplement to the author’s first work,  “The American Draught
 Player”; but it is complete in itself. It contains lucid instructions
 for beginners, laws of the game, diagrams, the score of 364 games,
 together with 34 novel, instructive and ingenious  “critical
 positions.”

  Cloth, gilt back and side    $1.50

 Spayth’s Draughts or Checkers for Beginners. This treatise was
 written by Henry Spayth, the celebrated player, and is by far the most
 complete and instructive elementary work on Draughts ever published.
 It is profusely illustrated with diagrams of ingenious stratagems,
 curious positions and perplexing problems, and contains a great
 variety of interesting and instructive Games, progressively arranged
 and clearly explained with notes, so that the learner may easily
 comprehend them. With the aid of this Manual a beginner may soon
 become a proficient in the game.

  Cloth, gilt side    75 cts.


 Scattergood’s Game of Draughts, or Checkers, Simplified and
 Explained. With practical Diagrams and Illustrations, together with
 a Checker-Board, numbered and printed in red. Containing the Eighteen
 Standard Games, with over 200 of the best variations, selected from
 various authors, with some never before published. By D. Scattergood.

  Bound in cloth, with flexible covers    50 cts.


 Marache’s Manual of Chess. Containing a description of the Board and
 Pieces, Chess Notation, Technical Terms, with diagrams illustrating
 them, Laws of the Game, Relative Value of Pieces, Preliminary Games
 for Beginners, Fifty Openings of Games, giving all the latest
 discoveries of Modern Masters, with the best games and copious notes,
 Twenty Endings of Games, showing easiest ways of effecting Checkmate,
 Thirty-six ingenious Diagram Problems, and sixteen curious Chess
 Stratagems, being one of the best Books for Beginners ever published.
 By N. Marache.

  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.
  Bound in cloth, gilt side        75 cts.


 Lola Montez’ Arts of Beauty; or, Secrets of a Lady’s Toilet.
 _With hints to Gentlemen on the Art of Fascinating._ Lola Montez
 here explains all the Arts employed by the celebrated beauties and
 fashionable ladies in Paris and other cities of Europe, for the
 purpose of preserving their beauty and improving and developing their
 charms. The recipes are all clearly given, so that any person can
 understand them, and the work embraces the following subjects:

 _How to obtain such desirable and indispensable attractions as A
 Handsome Form_;

 _A Bright and Smooth Skin_;

 _A Beautiful Complexion_;

 _Attractive Eyes, Mouth and Lips_;

 _A Beautiful Hand, Foot and Ankle_;

 _A Well-trained Voice_;

 _A Soft and Abundant Head of Hair_;

 _Also, How to Remedy Gray Hair_;

 _And harmless but effectual methods of removing Superfluous Hair and
 other blemishes, with interesting information on these and kindred
 matters._

  Illuminated paper cover    25 cts.


 Hillgrove’s Ball-Room Guide and Complete Dancing-Master. Containing
 a plain treatise on Etiquette and Deportment at Balls and Parties,
 with valuable hints on Dress and the Toilet, together with

 _Full Explanations of the Rudiments, Terms, Figures and Steps used in
 Dancing_;

 _Including Clear and Precise Instructions how to dance all kinds
 of Quadrilles, Waltzes, Polkas, Redowas, Reels, Round, Plain and
 Fancy Dances, so that any person may learn them without the aid of a
 Teacher_;

 _To which is added easy directions how to call out the Figures_

 of every dance, and the amount of music required for each. Illustrated
 with 176 descriptive engravings. By T. Hillgrove, Professor of Dancing.

  Bound in cloth, with gilt side and back      $1.00
  Bound in boards, with cloth back           75 cts.


 The Banjo, and How to Play it. Containing, in addition to the
 elementary studies, a choice collection of Polkas, Waltzes, Solos,
 Schottisches, Songs, Hornpipes, Jigs, Reels, etc., with full
 explanations of both the  “Banjo” and  “Guitar” styles of execution,
 and designed to impart a complete knowledge of the art of playing the
 Banjo practically, without the aid of a teacher. This work is arranged
 on the progressive system, showing the learner how to play the first
 few notes of a tune, then the next notes, and so on, a small portion
 at a time, until he has mastered the entire piece, every detail
 being as clearly and thoroughly explained as if he had a teacher at
 his elbow all the time. By Frank B. Converse, author of the  “Banjo
 without a Master.” 16mo., bound in boards, cloth back 50 cts.


 Ned Donnelly’s Art of Boxing. A thorough Manual of Sparring and
 Self-Defence, illustrated with Forty Engravings, showing the various
 Blows, Stops and Guards; by Ned Donnelly, Professor of Boxing to the
 London Athletic Club, etc., etc. This work explains in detail every
 movement of attack and defence in the clearest language, and in
 accordance with the most approved and modern methods; the engravings
 are very distinctly drawn, and show each position and motion as
 plainly as the personal instruction of a professor could convey it. It
 teaches all the feints and dodges practised by experienced boxers, and
 gives advice to those who desire to perfect themselves in the Manly
 Art. 121 pages.

  Price    25 cts.


 Athletic Sports for Boys. Containing clear and complete instructions
 in Gymnastics, and the manly accomplishments of Skating, Swimming,
 Rowing, Sailing, Horsemanship, Riding, Driving, Angling, Fencing and
 Broadsword. Illustrated with 194 wood cuts.

  Bound in boards      75 cts.


 Sut Lovingood. Yarns spun by  “A Nat’ral Born Durn’d Fool.” Warped
 and Wove for Public Wear, by George W. Harris. Illustrated with
 eight fine full page engravings, from designs by Howard. It would be
 difficult, we think, to cram a larger amount of pungent humor into 300
 pages than will be found in this really funny book. The Preface and
 Dedication are models of sly simplicity, and the 24 Sketches which
 follow are among the best specimens of broad burlesque to which the
 genius of the ludicrous, for which the Southwest is so distinguished,
 has yet given birth.

  12mo., tinted paper, cloth, gilt edges    $1.50

 Uncle Josh’s Trunkful of Fun. Containing a rich collection of

 _Comical Stones, Cruel Sells_,

 _Side-Splitting Jokes, Humorous Poetry_,

 _Quaint Parodies, Burlesque Sermons_,

 _New Conundrums, Mirth-Provoking Speeches_,

 _Curious Puzzles, Amusing Card Tricks, and_

 _Astonishing Feats of Parlor-Magic._

 This book is illustrated with nearly 200 funny engravings, and
 contains, in 64 large octavo double-column pages, at least three times
 as much reading matter and real fun as any other book of the price.

  15 cts.


 The Strange and Wonderful Adventures of Bachelor Butterfly. Showing
 how his passion for Natural History completely eradicated the tender
 passion implanted in his breast—also detailing his Extraordinary
 Travels, both by sea and land—his Hair-breadth Escapes from fire and
 cold—his being come over by a Widow with nine small children—his
 wonderful Adventures with the Doctor and the Fiddler and other Perils
 of a most extraordinary nature. The whole illustrated by about 200
 engravings.

  30 cts.


 The Laughable Adventures of Messrs. Brown, Jones and Robinson.
 Showing where they went, and how they went, what they did, and how
 they did it. Here is a book which will make you split your sides
 laughing. It shows the comical adventures of three jolly young
 greenhorns, who went traveling, and got into all manner of scrapes
 and funny adventures. Illustrated with nearly 200 thrillingly-comic
 engravings.

  30 cts.


 The Mishaps and Adventures of Obadiah Oldbuck. This humorous and
 curious book sets forth, with 188 comic drawings, the misfortunes
 which befell Mr. Oldbuck; and also his five unsuccessful attempts
 to commit suicide—his hair-breadth escapes from fire, water and
 famine—his affection for his poor dog, etc. To look over this book
 will make you laugh, and you can’t help it.

  30 cts.


 Jack Johnson’s Jokes for the Jolly. A collection of Funny Stories,
 Droll Incidents, Queer Conceits and Apt Repartees. Illustrating the
 Drolleries of Border Life in the West, Yankee Peculiarities, Dutch
 Blunders, French Sarcasms, Irish Wit and Humor, etc., with short
 Ludicrous Narratives; making altogether a Medley of Mirthful Morsels
 for the Melancholy that will drive away the blues, and cause the most
 misanthropic mortal to laugh.

  Illustrated paper covers    25 cts.


 Snipsnaps and Snickerings of Simon Snodgrass. A collection of Droll
 and Laughable Stories, illustrative of Irish Drolleries and Blarney,
 Ludicrous Dutch Blunders, Queer Yankee Tricks and Dodges, Backwoods
 Boasting, Humors of Horse-trading, Negro Comicalities, Perilous Pranks
 of Fighting Men, Frenchmen’s Queer Mistakes, Scotch Shrewdness, and
 other phases of eccentric character, that go to make up a perfect and
 complete Medley of Wit and Humor. It is also full of funny engravings.

  25 cts.


 Day’s Cards of Courtship. Arranged with such apt conversations,
 that you will be enabled to ask the momentous question categorically,
 in such a delicate manner that the young lady will not suspect what
 you are at. These cards may be used either by two persons, or they
 will make lots of fun for an evening party of young people. When used
 in a party, the question is read aloud by the lady receiving it—she
 shuffles and hands out an answer—and that also must be read aloud by
 the gentleman receiving it. The fun thus caused is intense. Put up in
 handsome card cases, on which are printed directions.

  30 cts.


 Day’s Love-Letter Cards; or, Love-Making Made Easy. We have just
 printed a novel Set of Cards which will delight the hearts of young
 people susceptible of the tender passion. Both letters and answers are
 either humorous or humorously sentimental—thus creating lots of fun
 when used at a party of young people—and special pains has been taken
 with them to avoid that silly, sentimental formality so common in
 printed letters of this kind. Put up in handsome cases, on which are
 printed directions.

  30 cts.


 Day’s Conversation Cards. A New and Original Set, comprising
 Eighteen Questions and Twenty-four Answers, so arranged that the whole
 of the answers are apt replies to each one of the eighteen questions.
 The plan of these Cards is very simple, and easily understood. Used
 by a party of young people, they will make a good deal of fun. The
 set comprises forty-two Cards in the aggregate, which are put up in a
 handsome case, with printed directions for use.

  30 cts.


 Day’s Fortune-Telling Cards. We have just printed an original set of
 Cards for telling fortunes, which are an improvement on any hitherto
 made. They are so arranged that each answer will respond to every one
 of the questions which may be put. These cards will also afford a fund
 of amusement in a party of young people. Each pack is enclosed in a
 card case, on which are printed directions.

  30 cts.


 Day’s Cards for Popping the Question. An Original Game for Lovers
 and Sweethearts, or for Merry-Making in a Party of Young People. As
 soon as these cards become known, we feel sure that they will have an
 endless sale. Put up in cases, with directions for playing.

  30 cts.


 Day’s Leap-Year Cards. To enable any lady to pop the question to
 the chosen one of her heart. This set of Cards is intended more to
 make fun among young people than for any practical utility. Put up in
 handsome cases, with printed directions.

  30 cts.


 Chesterfield’s Letter-Writer and Complete Book of Etiquette.
 Containing the Art of Letter-Writing simplified, a guide to friendly,
 affectionate, polite and business correspondence, and rules for
 punctuation and spelling, with complete rules of Etiquette and the
 usages of Society. An excellent hand-book for reference. 16mo., bound
 in boards. 40 cts.


 How to Behave; or, The Spirit of Etiquette. A Guide to Polite
 Society, for Ladies and Gentlemen; containing rules for good behavior
 at the dinner table, in the parlor, and in the street; with important
 hints on introduction, conversation, etc.

  12 cts.


 How to Win and How to Woo. Containing Rules for the Etiquette of
 Courtship, with directions showing how to win the favor of the Ladies,
 how to begin and end a Courtship, and how Love-Letters should be
 written.

  15 cts.


 Allyn’s Ritual of Freemasonry. Containing a complete Key to the
 following Degrees: Degree of Entered Apprentice; Degree of Fellow
 Craft; Degree of Master Mason; Degree of Mark Master; Degree of Past
 Master; Degree of Excellent Master; Degree of Royal Arch; Royal Arch
 Chapter; Degree of Royal Master; Degree of Select Master; Degree of
 Super-Excellent Master; Degree of Ark and Dove; Degree of Knights
 of Constantinople; Degree of Secret Monitor; Degree of Heroine of
 Jericho; Degree of Knights of Three Kings; Mediterranean Pass; Order
 of Knights of the Red Cross; Order of Knights Templar and Knights of
 Malta; Knights of the Christian Mark, and Guards of the Conclave;
 Knights of the Holy Sepulchre; The Holy and Thrice Illustrious Order
 of the Cross; Secret Master; Perfect Master; Intimate Secretary;
 Provost and Judge; Intendant of the Buildings, or Master in Israel;
 Elected Knights of Nine; Elected Grand Master; Sublime Knights
 Elected; Grand Master Architect; Knights of the Ninth Arch; Grand
 Elect; Perfect and Sublime Mason. Illustrated with 38 copper-plate
 engravings.

  By Avery Allyn, K. R. C. K. T. K. M., etc. 12mo., cloth.      $5.00.


 Lester’s  “Look to the East.” (Webb Work.) A Ritual of the First
 Three Degrees of Masonry. Containing the complete work of the Entered
 Apprentice, Fellow Craft and Master Mason’s Degrees, and their
 Ceremonies, Lectures, etc. Edited by Ralph P. Lester. This complete
 and beautiful Pocket Manual of the First Three Degrees of Masonry is
 printed in clear, legible type and not obscured by any attempts at
 cypher or other perplexing contractions. It differs entirely from all
 other Manuals, from the fact that it contains neither the passwords,
 grips, nor any other purely esoteric matter, with which Masons, and
 Masons only, are necessarily entirely familiar. It affords, therefore,
 a thorough guide to the regular  “work” in the above degrees, divested
 of everything that any member of the Fraternity would object to see in
 print, or hesitate to carry in his pocket.

  Bound in cloth                                    $2.00.
  Leather tucks (pocket book style), gilt edges     $2.50.


 Courtship Made Easy; or, The Art of Making Love Fully Explained.
 Containing full directions for Conducting a Courtship with Ladies
 of every age and position in society, and valuable information for
 persons who desire to enter the marriage state. Also, forms of
 Love-letters to be used on certain occasions.

  64 pages    15 cts.


 How Gamblers Win; or the Secrets of Advantage Playing Exposed.
 Being a complete and scientific exposé of the manner of playing all
 the numerous advantages in the various Card Games, as practised
 by professional gamblers. This work is designed as a warning to
 self-confident card-players.

  Bound in boards, with cloth back    50 cts.


 Row’s Complete Fractional Ready Reckoner. For buying and selling any
 kind of merchandise, giving the fractional parts of a pound, yard,
 etc., from one-quarter to one thousand, at any price from one-quarter
 of a cent to five dollars. By Nelson Row. 36mo., 232 pages, Boards.

  50 cts.


 How to Talk and Debate; or, Fluency of Speech Attained without the
 Sacrifice of Elegance and Sense. A useful hand-book on Conversation
 and Debate.

  12 cts.


 Boxing Made Easy; or, The Complete Manual of Self-Defense. Clearly
 Explained and Illustrated in a Series of Easy Lessons, with some
 Important Hints to Wrestlers.

  15 cts.


 What Shall We Do To-Night? or, Social Amusements for Evening
 Parties. This elegant book affords an almost inexhaustible fund of
 amusement for evening parties, social gatherings and all festive
 occasions, ingeniously grouped together so as to furnish complete and
 ever-varying entertainment for Twenty-six evenings. Its repertoire
 embraces all the best round and forfeit games, clearly described
 and rendered perfectly plain by original and amusing examples,
 interspersed with a great variety of ingenious puzzles, entertaining
 tricks and innocent sells; new and original Musical and Poetical
 pastimes, startling illusions and mirth-provoking exhibitions;
 including complete directions and text for performing Charades,
 Tableaux, Parlor Pantomimes, the world-renowned Punch and Judy,
 Gallanty Shows and original Shadow-pantomimes; also, full information
 for the successful performance of Dramatic Dialogues and Parlor
 Theatricals, with a selection of Original Plays, etc., written
 expressly for this work. It is embellished with over one hundred
 descriptive and explanatory engravings, and contains 366 pages,
 printed on fine toned paper.

  Extra cloth     $2.00


 The Secret Out; or, 1,000 Tricks with Cards, and Other Recreations.
 Illustrated with over 300 engravings. A book which explains all
 the Tricks and Deceptions with Playing Cards ever known, and
 gives, besides, a great many new ones. The whole being described
 so carefully, with engravings to illustrate them, that anybody can
 easily learn how to perform them. This work also contains 240 of the
 best Tricks of Legerdemain, in addition to the Card Tricks. Such is
 the unerring process of instruction adopted in this volume, that no
 reader can fail to succeed in executing every Trick, Experiment,
 Game, etc., set down, if he will at all devote his attention, in his
 leisure hours, to the subject; and, as almost every trick with cards
 known will be found in this collection, it may be considered the only
 complete work on the subject ever published.

  12mo., 400 pages, bound in cloth, gilt side and back     $1.50


 The Magician’s Own Book; or, The Whole Art of Conjuring. A complete
 hand-book of Parlor Magic, containing over a thousand Optical,
 Chemical, Mechanical, Magnetic and Magical Experiments, Amusing
 Transmutations, Astonishing Sleights and Subtleties, Celebrated Card
 Deceptions, Ingenious Tricks with Numbers, curious and entertaining
 Puzzles, the Art of Secret Writing, together with all the most noted
 tricks of modern performers. Illustrated with over 500 wood-cuts, the
 whole forming a comprehensive guide for amateurs.

  12mo., cloth, gilt    $1.50


 The Sociable; or, One Thousand and One Home Amusements. Containing
 Acting Proverbs, Dramatic Charades, Acting Charades or Drawing-room
 Pantomimes, Musical Burlesques, Tableaux Vivants, Parlor Games, Games
 of Action, Forfeits, Science in Sport and Parlor Magic, and a choice
 collection of curious Mental and Mechanical Puzzles, etc. Illustrated
 with numerous engravings and diagrams. The whole being a fund of
 never-ending entertainment.

  376 pages, cloth, gilt    $1.50


 Confectioner’s Hand-Book. Giving plain and practical directions for
 making Confectionery. Containing upwards of three hundred Recipes,
 consisting of directions for making all sorts of Candies, Jellies,
 Comfits, Preserves, Sugar Boiling, Iced Liquors, Waters, Gum, Paste
 and Candy Ornaments, Syrups, Marmalades, Essences, Fruit Pastes, Ice
 Creams, Icings, Meringues, Chocolates, etc., etc. A complete Hand-Book
 of the Confectioner’s Art.

  Price    25 cts.


 Howard’s Book of Love-Poetry. A Curious and Beautiful Collection
 of Tenderly Delicate, Sweetly Pathetic and Amusingly Quizzical
 Poetical Love-Addresses; containing a large number of the most admired
 selections from the leading Poets suitable for quotations in Love
 Letters, and applicable to all phases and contingencies incident to
 the tender passion. 141 pages.

  Price        25 cts.


 Brisbane’s Golden Ready-Reckoner. Calculated in Dollars and Cents.
 Showing at once the amount or value of any number of articles or
 quantity of goods, or any merchandise, either by gallon, quart, pint,
 ounce, pound, quarter, hundred, yard, foot, inch, bushel, etc., in an
 easy and plain manner. To which are added Interest Tables, calculated
 in dollars and cents, for days and for months, at six per cent. and at
 seven per cent. per annum, alternately; and a great number of other
 Tables and Rules for calculation never before in print. Bound in
 boards. 35 cts.


 How to Cook Potatoes, Apples, Eggs and Fish, Four Hundred Different
 Ways. Our lady friends will be surprised when they examine this
 book, and find the great variety of ways that the same article may be
 prepared and cooked. The work especially recommends itself to those
 who are often embarrassed for want of variety in dishes suitable for
 the breakfast-table, or on occasions where the necessity arises for
 preparing a meal at short notice.

  Paper covers                          30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back      50 cts.


 The Science of Self-Defense. Illustrated with explanatory
 engravings. This book was written by Ned Price, the celebrated
 boxer, and is the best work that was ever written upon the subject
 of Sparring and Wrestling. It contains all the tricks and stratagems
 resorted to by professional boxers, and the descriptions of the
 passes, blows and parries are all clearly explained by the aid of
 numerous diagrams and engravings. That portion of the work which
 treats on wrestling is particularly thorough, and is well illustrated
 with engravings.

  Bound in boards    75 cts.


 Richardson’s Monitor of Freemasonry. A complete Guide to the
 various Ceremonies and Routine in Freemasons’ Lodges, Chapters,
 Encampments, Hierarchies, etc., in all the Degrees, whether Modern,
 Ancient, Ineffable, Philosophical or Historical. Containing, also,
 the Lectures, Addresses, Charges, Signs, Tokens, Grips, Passwords,
 Regalias and Jewels in each Degree. Profusely illustrated with
 Explanatory Engravings, Plans of the interior of Lodges, etc.

  185 pages, paper covers                      75 cts.
  Bound in gilt                                 $1.25.
  Bound in leather tucks (pocket-book style)    $2.00.


 How to Cook and How to Carve. Giving plain and easily understood
 directions for preparing and cooking, with the greatest economy, every
 kind of dish, with complete instructions for serving the same. This
 book is just the thing for a young Housekeeper. It is worth a dozen of
 expensive French books.

  Paper covers                           30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back       50 cts.


 The American Home Cook Book. Containing several hundred excellent
 recipes. The whole based on many years’ experience of an American
 Housewife, Illustrated with engravings. All the recipes in this book
 are written from actual experience in Cooking. Paper. 30 cts.

  Bound in boards, cloth back    50 cts.


 The Yankee Cook Book. A new system of Cookery. Containing hundreds
 of excellent recipes from actual experience in Cooking; also, full
 explanations in the art of Carving.

  126 pages, paper covers                30 cts.
  Bound in boards, with cloth back       50 cts.


 Morgan’s Freemasonry Exposed and Explained. Showing the Origin,
 History and Nature of Masonry, and containing a Key to all the Degrees
 of Freemasonry. Giving a clear and correct view of the manner of
 conferring the different degrees, as practised in all Lodges. 25 cts.


                                DICK’S
                             ENCYCLOPEDIA
                                  OF
                   Practical Receipts and Processes,
                     PRINTED ON FINE TONED PAPER.
                 CONTAINING 6,422 PRACTICAL RECEIPTS,

 Written in a plain and popular manner, and illustrated with
 explanatory wood-cuts. Being a comprehensive Book of Reference for the
 Merchant, Manufacturer, Artisan, Amateur and Housekeeper, embracing
 valuable information in the Arts, Professions, Trades, Manufactures,
 including Medicine, Pharmacy and Domestic Economy. It is certainly the
 most useful-day life ever printed. THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN says:  “It
 is worthy of a place in the library of any home, work-shop, factory or
 laboratory.” Prominent among the immense mass of subjects treated of
 in the book, are the following:

  _The Art of Dyeing_;
  _Hard, Soft and Toilet Soaps_;
  _Tanning_;
  _Distillation_;
  _Imitation Liquors_;
  _Wines, Cordials and Bitters_;
  _Cider_;
  _Brewing_;
  _Perfumery_;
  _Cologne Water and Perfumed Spirits_;
  _Flavoring Essences, etc._;
  _Cosmetics_;
  _Hair Dyes and Washes_;
  _Pomades and Perfumed Oils_;
  _Tooth Powders, etc._;
  _Syrups_;
  _Alcohol and Alcoholmetry_;
  _Petroleum and Kerosene_;
  _Bleaching and Cleaning_;
  _Scouring and Cleansing_;
  _Vinegar_;
  _Sauces, Catsups and Pickles_;
  _Receipts for the Garden_;
  _To Remove Stains, Spots, etc._;
  _The Extermination of Vermin_;
  _Pyrotechny and Explosives_;
  _Cements, etc._;
  _Soluble Glass_;
  _Waterproofing_;
  _Artificial Gems_;
  _Inks and Writing Fluids_;
  _Aniline Colors_;
  _Liquid Colors_;
  _Paints and Pigments_;
  _Drying Oils and Dryers_;
  _Painting and Paper-hanging_;
  _Kalsomine and Whitewash_;
  _Oil and Spirit Varnishes_;
  _Varnishing and Polishing_;
  _Lubricators_;
  _Japanning and Lacquering_;
  _Boot and Harness Blacking_;
  _Photography_;
  _Metals and Alloys_;
  _Soldering and Welding_;
  _Amalgams_;
  _Gilding, Silvering, etc._;
  _Electrotyping, Electroplating, etc._;
  _Medicinal Preparations_;
  _Patent Medicines_;
  _Medical Receipts_;
  _Weights and Measures._

  607 pages, royal octavo, cloth    $5.00
  Sheep                              6.00

  DICK & FITZGERALD, Publishers,
  Box 2975.             NEW YORK.

Agents Wanted to Canvass for this Work.


 The Biblical Reason Why. A Hand-Book for Biblical Students, and a
 guide to family Scripture reading. This work gives REASONS founded
 upon the Bible, and assigned by the most eminent Divines and Christian
 Philosophers, for the great and all-absorbing events recorded in the
 History of the Bible, the Life of our Saviour and the Acts of His
 Apostles.

 EXAMPLE.

 _Why did the first patriarchs attain such extreme longevity?_

 _Why was the term of life afterwards shortened?_

 _Why are there several manifest variations in names, facts and dates,
 between the books of Kings and Chronicles?_

 _Why is the book of the Prophecies of Isaiah a strong proof of the
 authenticity of the whole Bible?_

 _Why did our Saviour receive the name of Jesus?_

 _Why did John the Baptist hesitate to administer the rite of Baptism
 to Jesus?_

 This volume answers 1,493 similar questions. Beautifully illustrated.

  Large 12mo, cloth, gilt side and back    $1.50


 The Reason Why: General Science. A careful collection of reasons
 for some thousands of things which, though generally known, are
 imperfectly understood. A book for the million. This work assigns
 reasons for the thousands of things that daily fall under the eye of
 the intelligent observer, and of which he seeks a simple and clear
 explanation.

 EXAMPLE.

 _Why does silver tarnish when exposed to light?_

 _Why do some colors fade, and others darken, when exposed to the sun?_

 _Why is the sky blue?_

 _What develops electricity in the clouds?_

 _Why does dew form round drops upon the leaves of plants?_

 This volume answers 1,325 similar questions. 356 pages, bound in
 cloth, gilt, and embellished with a large number of wood-cuts,
 illustrating the various subjects treated of.

  $1.50


 The Reason Why: Natural History. Giving reasons for hundreds of
 interesting facts in connection with Zoology, and throwing a light
 upon the peculiar habits and instincts of the various orders of the
 Animal Kingdom.

 EXAMPLE.

 _Why has the lion such a large mane?_

 _Why does the otter, when hunting for fish, swim against the stream?_

 _Why do dogs turn around two or three times before they lie down?_

 _Why have flat fishes their upper sides dark and their under sides
 white?_

 _Why do sporting dogs make what is termed "a point"?_

 _Why do birds often roost upon one leg?_

 _Why do frogs keep their mouths closed while breathing?_

 _Why does the wren build several nests, but occupy only one?_

This volume answers about 1,500 similar questions.

  Illustrated, cloth, gilt side and back      $1.50


 Frost’s American Etiquette; or, Laws of Good Society. A condensed
 but thorough treatise on Etiquette and its Usages in America.
 Containing plain and reliable directions for correct deportment in
 every situation and under all circumstances in life, including special
 directions and instructions on the following subjects:

  _Letters of Introduction._
  _Salutes and Salutations._
  _Calls._
  _Conversation._
  _Invitations._
  _Dinner Company._
  _Balls._
  _Morning and Evening Parties._
  _Visiting._
  _Street Etiquette._
  _Riding and Driving._
  _Traveling._
  _Etiquette in Church._
  _Etiquette for Places of Amusement._
  _Servants._
  _Hotel Etiquette._
  _Etiquette at Weddings._
  _Baptisms and Funerals._
  _Etiquette with Children and at the Card Table._
  _Visiting Cards._
  _Letter Writing._
  _The Lady’s Toilet._
  _The Gentleman’s Toilet._

BESIDES ONE HUNDRED UNCLASSIFIED LAWS APPLICABLE TO ALL OCCASIONS.

  Paper covers                   30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back    50 cts.


 Live and Learn; or, One Thousand Mistakes of Daily Occurrence in
 Speaking, Writing and Pronunciation, Corrected and Explained. There
 are hundreds of persons who are sensible of their deficiencies on
 many points connected with the Grammar of their own tongue, and who,
 by self tuition, may correct such deficiencies. For such persons this
 book has been written.

 _It Corrects and Explains 1,000 Mistakes of Daily Occurrence in
 Speaking, Writing and Pronunciation._

 _It Explains the many Perplexing points that occasion difficulty to
 the student._

 _It Explains most of the Latin and French words and phrases of
 frequent occurrence in newspapers, magazines and Books._

 _It shows how to punctuate and paragraph correctly._

 _It shows all the current improprieties of expression and gives rules
 for their correction._

 _It gives clear rules for the use of Capitals and Italics._

 _It gives plain, general rules for spelling._

 _It gives detailed instructions for writing for the Press in the
 various departments of newspaper and general literature._

  213 pages, paper cover           30 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back      50 cts.


 Confectioner’s Hand-Book. Giving plain and practical directions for
 making Confectionery. Containing upwards of three hundred Recipes,
 consisting of directions for making all sorts of Candies, Jellies,
 Comfits, Preserves, Sugar Boiling, Iced Liquors, Waters, Gum, Paste
 and Candy Ornaments, Syrups, Marmalades, Essences, Fruit Pastes, Ice
 Creams, Icings, Meringues, Chocolates, etc., etc. A complete Hand-Book
 of the Confectioner’s Art.

  Price       25 cts.


 Howard’s Book of Love-Poetry. A Curious and Beautiful Collection
 of Tenderly Delicate, Sweetly Pathetic, and Amusingly Quizzical
 Poetical Love-Addresses; containing a large number of the most
 admired selections from the leading Poets suitable for quotations in
 Love-Letters, and applicable to all phases and contingencies incident
 to the tender passion.

  141 pages       25 cts.


  “Trump’s” American Hoyle; or, Gentleman’s Hand-Book of Games. This
 work contains an exhaustive treatise on Whist, by William Pole, F.R.S.
 and the rules for playing that game as laid down by the Hon. James
 Clay. It also contains clear descriptions of all the games played in
 the United States, with the American rules for playing them; including

 _Euchre, Bézique, Cribbage, Baccara, All Fours, Loo, Poker, Brag,
 Piquet, Pedro Sancho, Penuchle, Railroad Euchre, Jack Pots, Ecarté,
 Boston, California Jack, Cassino, Chess, Checkers, Backgammon,
 Billiards, Dominoes, and a hundred other games._

 [Illustration]

 This work is designed as an American authority in all games of skill
 and chance, and will settle any disputed point. It has been prepared
 with great care, and is not a re-hash of English games, but a live
 American book, expressly prepared for American players. THE AMERICAN
 HOYLE contains 525 pages, is printed on fine white paper, bound in
 cloth, with extra gilt side and beveled boards, and is profusely
 illustrated.

  $2.00


 Spayth’s American Draught Player; or, The Theory and Practice of
 the Scientific Game of Checkers. Simplified and Illustrated with
 Practical Diagrams. Containing upwards of 1,700 Games and Positions.
 By Henry Spayth. Fifth edition, with over two hundred Corrections
 and Improvements. Containing: The Standard Laws of the Game—Full
 Instructions—Draught Board Numbered—Names of the Games, and how
 formed—The  “Theory of the Move and its Changes” practically explained
 and illustrated with Diagrams—Playing Tables for Draught Clubs—New
 Systems of Numbering the Board—Prefixing Signs to the Variations—List
 of Draught Treatises and Publications chronologically arranged.

  Bound in cloth, gilt side and back     $3.00


[Illustration]

 Sut Lovingood. Yarns spun by  “A Nat’ral Born Durn’d Fool.” Warped
 and Wove for Public Wear by George W. Harris. Illustrated with
 eight fine full page engravings from designs by Howard. It would be
 difficult, we think, to cram a larger amount of pungent humor into 300
 pages than will be found in this really funny book. The Preface and
 Dedication are models of sly simplicity, and the 24 Sketches which
 follow are among the best specimens of broad burlesque to which the
 genius of the ludicrous, for which the Southwest is so distinguished,
 has yet given birth.

  Cloth, gilt edges    $1.50

 [Illustration]


 How to Conduct a Debate. A Series of

  _Complete Debates,
  Outlines of Debates, and
  Questions for Discussion._

 In the complete debates, the questions for discussion are defined, the
 debate formally opened, an array of brilliant arguments adduced on
 either side, and the debate closed according to parliamentary usages.
 The second part consists of questions for debate, with heads of
 arguments, for and against, given in a condensed form for the speakers
 to enlarge upon to suit their own fancy. In addition to these are

  _A Large Collection of Debatable Questions_.

 The authorities to be referred to for information are given at the
 close of every debate. By Frederic Rowton.

  232 pages, paper               50 cts.
  Bound in boards, cloth back    75 cts.


 The Secret Out; or, 1,000 Tricks with Cards, and Other Recreations.
 Illustrated with over 300 engravings. A book which explains all the
 Tricks and Deceptions with Playing Cards ever known, and gives,
 besides, a great many new ones. The whole being described so
 carefully, with engravings to illustrate them, that anybody can easily
 learn how to perform them. This work also contains 240 of the best
 Tricks of Legerdemain, in addition to the Card Tricks.

[Illustration]

SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

 PART I.—_Tricks with Cards performed by skillful Manipulation and
 Sleight of Hand._

 PART II.—_Tricks performed by the aid of Memory, Mental Calculation
 and the Peculiar Arrangement of the Cards._

 PART III.—_Tricks with Cards performed by the aid of Confederacy and
 sheer Audacity._

 PART IV.—_Tricks performed by the aid of Ingenious Apparatus and
 Prepared Cards._

 PART V.—_Tricks of Legerdemain, Conjuring, Sleight of Hand and other
 Fancies, commonly called White Magic._

 PART VI.—_Tricks in White Magic, performed by the aid of Ingenious
 Contrivance and Simple Apparatus._

 PART VII.—_Natural Magic, or Recreations in Science, embracing Curious
 Amusements in Magnetism, Mechanics, Acoustics, Chemistry, Hydraulics
 and Optics._

 PART VIII.—_A Curious Collection of Entertaining Experiments, Amusing
 Puzzles, Queer Sleights, Including the Celebrated Science of Second
 Sight, Recreations in Arithmetic, and Fireside Games for Family
 Pastime, and other Astonishing Scientific Paradoxes and Attractive
 Amusements._

 THE SECRET OUT is, by all odds, the most curious book that has been
 published in many years, and lays bare the whole machinery of magic,
 and with a simplicity so perfect that nobody can fail to become a
 domestic magician in a week, with very little study and practice. Such
 is the unerring process of instruction adopted in this volume, that no
 reader can fail to succeed in executing every Trick, Experiment, Game,
 etc., set down, if he will at all devote his attention, in his leisure
 hours, to the subject; and, as every trick with cards known will be
 found in this collection, it may be considered the only complete work
 on the subject ever published.

  400 pages, bound in cloth, gilt    $1.50


GOOD BOOKS

Sent Free of Postage at the Prices Marked.


  Barber’s Book of American Ready-Made Speeches.    50 cts.
  Dick’s Quadrille Call-Book and Ball-Room Prompter.     50 “
  The American Hoyle; or, Gentleman’s Hand-Book of Games. By
    “Trumps, ”.      2.00 ”
  The Art and Etiquette of Making Love.    50  “
  How to Amuse an Evening Party.    30 “
  Frost’s Etiquette of American Society.    50  “
  Frost’s Original Letter-Writer.    50 “
  North’s Book of Love-Letters.    50  “
  How to Shine in Society.    25 “
  Dick’s Recitations and Readings.    30  “
  Frost’s Humorous Dialogues.    30 “
  The Banjo, and How to Play It.    50  “
  Day’s Book-keeping without a Master.    50 “
  Thimm’s French Self-Taught.    25  “
  Thimm’s German Self-Taught.    25 “
  Thimm’s Spanish Self-Taught.    25  “
  How to Learn the Sense of 3,000 French Words in One Hour.    25 “
  How to Speak in Public.    25  “
  Jack Johnson’s Jokes for the Jolly.    25 “
  The Tramp and his Tricks.    25  “
  The Modern Hoyle’s Games.     50 “
  How Gamblers Win.     50  “
  Kavanaugh’s Humorous Dramas for Private Theatricals.    50 “
  100 Gamblers’ Tricks with Cards.     30  “
  Uncle Josh’s Trunk-full of Fun.     15 “
  Spayth’s American Draught-Player.     3.00  “
  Marasche’s Manual of Chess.    50 “
  The Amateur Trapper and Trapmaker’s Guide.    50  “
  How to Write a Composition.    50 “
  The Young Debater and Chairman’s Assistant.    50  “
  The Young Reporter; or, How to Write Short-Hand.    50 “
  "Look to the East, “ Masonic, (Webb Work).     2 00 “
  The Yankee Cook-Book.    50  “
  How to Mix all Kinds of Fancy Drinks.     50 “
  Parlor Tricks with Cards, 70 Engravings.    30  “
  Book of 500 Puzzles.    30 “
  Book of Fireside Games.    30  “
  How to Conduct a Debate.     50 “
  Howard’s Book of 1,000 Conundrums.    30  “
  The Parlor Magician, 121 Engravings.     30 “
  Lander’s Exposure of Odd-Fellowship.     25  “
  Fontaine’s Dream-Book and Fortune-Teller.    40 “
  Day’s Ready-Reckoner.     50  “
  Book of Riddles, and 500 Amusements.    30 “
  How to Make and Keep a Vegetable Garden.     50  “
  Boxing Made Easy.    15 “
  Brudder Bones’ Book of Stump Speeches.    30 “


  Send Cash Orders to    DICK & FITZGERALD,
  P. O. Box 2975.         Publishers, New York.




