




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  This book has only two footnotes and they have been placed very
  close to their anchors. These anchors are denoted by [A] and [B].

  The Table of Contents has been created by the transcriber and is
  hereby placed in the public domain.

  This edition of the diary was self-published in 1881 by the author
  John Ransom. It had first been printed some years earlier in a
  Michigan newspaper. Many minor printer’s errors have been corrected
  in this etext, and are noted at the end of the book. Misspellings
  in the diary text have been left unchanged.

  The ‘List of the Dead’ is printed following the diary itself and is
  essentially a reprint, in a similar but different format, of the
  source document held in the Library of Congress. This source list
  was compiled by the efforts of Dorence Atwater and Clara Barton, and
  can now be viewed online at https://www.loc.gov/item/37031864

  This records the deaths of prisoners which occurred in the fourteen
  months between March 1864 and April 1865. It is organized by State,
  and names are listed alphabetically by first letter only. More
  details can be found in the Transcriber Note at the end of the book.

  On handheld devices this long list is best viewed in landscape mode
  using a monospace font.




                         Andersonville Diary,

                               ESCAPE,

                               ——AND——

                          LIST OF THE DEAD,

                               ——WITH——

                  NAME, CO., REGIMENT, DATE OF DEATH

                               ——AND——

                      No. of Grave in Cemetery.


                [Illustration: (decorative separator)]


                           JOHN L. RANSOM,

               _LATE FIRST SERGEANT NINTH MICH. CAV._,

                        AUTHOR AND PUBLISHER.

                            AUBURN, N. Y.
                                1881.




     “Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1881, by
          JOHN L. RANSOM, in the office of the Librarian of
                      Congress, at Washington.”




                             DEDICATION.


                                TO THE

                      MOTHERS, WIVES AND SISTERS

                         OF THOSE WHOSE NAMES

                 _ARE HEREIN RECORDED AS HAVING DIED_

                                 —IN—

                           =ANDERSONVILLE=,

                 THIS BOOK IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED

                            BY THE AUTHOR.


[Illustration: (separator; small circular river scene)]


[Illustration: John L. Ransom.

(From a photograph taken two months before capture.)]


[Illustration: (butterfly)]




INTRODUCTION.


The book to which these lines form an introduction is a peculiar one
in many respects. It is a story, but it is a true story, and written
years ago with little idea that it would ever come into this form.
The writer has been induced, only recently, by the advice of friends
and by his own feeling that such a production would be appreciated,
to present what, at the time it was being made up, was merely a means
of occupying a mind which had to contemplate, besides, only the
horrors of a situation from which death would have been, and was to
thousands, a happy relief.

The original diary in which these writings were made from day to day
was destroyed by fire some years after the war, but its contents
had been printed in a series of letters to the Jackson, (Mich.)
_Citizen_, and to the editor and publisher of that journal thanks are
now extended for the privilege of using his files for the preparation
of this work. There has been little change in the entries in the
diary, before presenting them here. In such cases the words which
suggest themselves at the time are best—they cannot be improved upon
by substitution at a later day.

This book is essentially different from any other that has been
published concerning the “late war” or any of its incidents.
Those who have had any such experience as the author will see its
truthfulness at once, and to all other readers it is commended as a
statement of actual things by one who experienced them to the fullest.

The annexed list of the Andersonville dead is from the rebel official
records, is authentic, and will be found valuable in many pension
cases and otherwise.


[Illustration: GOOD LUCK]




CONTENTS


  THE CAPTURE                                         9

  NEW YEAR’S DAY                                     23

  PEMERTON BUILDING                                  34

  ANDERSONVILLE                                      41

  FROM BAD TO WORSE                                  65

  THE RAIDERS PUT DOWN                               75

  AN ACCOUNT OF THE HANGING                          81

  MOVED JUST IN TIME                                 91

  HOSPITAL LIFE                                      97

  REMOVED TO MILLEN                                 109

  ESCAPE BUT NOT ESCAPE                             120

  RE-CAPTURED                                       127

  A SUCCESSFUL ESCAPE                               136

  SAFE AND SOUND                                    154

  THE FINIS                                         160

  MICHAEL HOARE’S ESCAPE                            167

  REBEL TESTIMONY                                   172

  SUMMARY                                           187

  THE WAR’S DEAD                                    188

  EX-PRISONERS AND PENSIONERS                       189

  LIST OF THE DEAD                                  193

  A LIST OF OFFICERS IMPRISONED AT CAMP ASYLUM      289




THE CAPTURE.

  A REBEL RUSE TO GOBBLE UP UNION TROOPS—A COMPLETE SURPRISE—CARELESS
  OFFICERS—HEROIC DEFENCE—BEGINNING OF A LONG IMPRISONMENT.


BELLE ISLAND, Richmond, Va., Nov. 22, 1863.—I was captured near
Rogersville, East Tennessee, on the 6th of this month, while acting
as Brigade Quarter-Master Sergt. The Brigade was divided, two
regiments twenty miles away, while Brigade Head-Quarters with 7th
Ohio and 1st Tennessee Mounted Infantry were at Rogersville. The
brigade quarter-master had a large quantity of clothing on hand,
which we were about to issue to the brigade as soon as possible. The
rebel citizens got up a dance at one of the public houses in the
village, and invited all the union officers. This was the evening
of Nov. 5th. Nearly all the officers attended and were away from
the command nearly all night and many were away all night. We were
encamped in a bend of the Holston River. It was a dark rainy night
and the river rose rapidly before morning. The dance was a ruse
to get our officers away from their command. At break of day the
pickets were drove in by rebel cavalry, and orders were immediately
received from commanding officer to get wagon train out on the road
in ten minutes. The quarter-master had been to the dance and had not
returned, consequently it devolved upon me to see to wagon train,
which I did, and in probably ten minutes the whole seventy six mule
army wagons were in line out on the main road, while the companies
were forming into line and getting ready for a fight. Rebels had us
completely surrounded and soon began to fire volley after volley into
our disorganized ranks. Not one officer in five was present; Gen.
commanding and staff as soon as they realized our danger, started
for the river, swam across and got away. We had a small company of
artillery with us commanded by a lieutenant. The lieutenant in the
absence of other officers, assumed command of the two regiments,
and right gallantly did he do service. Kept forming his men for the
better protection of his wagon train, while the rebels were shifting
around from one point to another, and all the time sending volley
after volley into our ranks. Our men did well, and had there been
plenty of officers and ammunition, we might have gained the day.
After ten hours fighting we were obliged to surrender after having
lost in killed over a hundred, and three or four times that number
in wounded. After surrendering we were drawn up into line, counted
off and hurriedly marched away south. By eight o’clock at night had
probably marched ten miles, and encamped until morning. We expected
that our troops would intercept and release us, but they did not.
An hour before daylight we were up and on the march toward Bristol,
Va., that being the nearest railroad station. We were cavalrymen,
and marching on foot made us very lame, and we could hardly hobble
along. Were very well fed on corn bread and bacon. Reached Bristol,
Va., Nov. 8th and were soon aboard of cattle cars en-route for the
rebel capital. I must here tell how I came into possession of a very
nice and large bed spread which is doing good service even now these
cold nights. After we were captured everything was taken away from
us, blankets, overcoats, and in many cases our boots and shoes. I had
on a new pair of boots, which by muddying them over had escaped the
rebel eyes thus far, as being a good pair. As our blankets had been
taken away from us we suffered considerably from cold. I saw that if
I was going to remain a prisoner of war it behooved me to get hold of
a blanket. After a few hours march I became so lame walking with my
new boots on that the rebels were compelled to put me on an old horse
that was being lead along by one of the guard. This guard had the
bed spread before spoken of. Told him I was going into prison at the
beginning of a long winter, and should need a blanket, and couldn’t
he give me his. We had considerable talk, and were very good friends.
Said he rather liked me but wouldn’t part with his bed spread. Didn’t
love me that much, treated me however with apple jack out of his
canteen. I kept getting my wits together to arrange some plan to get
the article in question. Finally told him I had a large sum of money
on my person which I expected would be taken away from me anyway, and
as he was a good fellow would rather he would have it than any one
else. He was delighted and all attention, wanted me to be careful
and not let any of the other rebels see the transfer. I had a lot of
Michigan broken down wild cat money, and pulled it out of an inside
pocket and handed him the roll. It was green paper and of course
he supposed it greenbacks. Was very glad of the gift and wanted to
know what he could do for me. My first proposition to him was to let
me escape, but he couldn’t do that, then I told him to give me the
bed spread, as it might save my life. After some further parley, he
consented and handed over the spread. He was afraid to look at his
money for fear some one would see him, and so did not discover that
it was worthless until we had become separated. Guards were changed
that night and never saw him any more.

The cars ran very slow, and being crowded for room the journey to
Richmond was very tedious. Arrived on the morning of Nov. 13th, seven
days after capture, at the south end of the “long bridge,” ordered
out of the cars and into line, counted off and started for Belle
Isle. Said island is in the James River, probably covers ten or
twelve acres, and is right across from Richmond. The river between
Richmond and the island is probably a third or half a mile. The
“long bridge” is near the lower part of the island. It is a cold,
bleak piece of ground and the winter winds have free sweep from up
the river. Before noon we were turned into the pen which is merely
enclosed by a ditch and the dirt taken from the ditch thrown up on
the outside, making a sort of breastwork. The ditch serves as a
dead line, and no prisoners must go near the ditch. The prison is
in command of a Lieut. Bossieux, a rather young and gallant looking
sort of fellow. Is a born Southerner, talking so much like a negro
that you would think he was one, if you could hear him talk and not
see him. He has two rebel sergeants to act as his assistants, Sergt.
Hight and Sergt. Marks. These two men are very cruel, as is also the
Lieut. when angered. Outside the prison pen is a bake house, made of
boards, the rebel tents for the accommodation of the officers and
guard, and a hospital also of tent cloth. Running from the pen is a
lane enclosed by high boards going to the water’s edge. At night this
is closed up by a gate at the pen, and thrown open in the morning.
About half of the six thousand prisoners here have tents while the
rest sleep and live out of doors. After I had been on this island two
or three days, I was standing near the gate eating some rice soup
out of an old broken bottle, thoroughly disgusted with the Southern
Confederacy, and this prison in particular. A young man came up to me
whom I immediately recognized as George W. Hendryx, a member of my
own company “A” 9th Mich. Cavalry, who had been captured some time
before myself. Was feeling so blue, cross and cold that I didn’t care
whether it was him or not. He was on his way to the river to get
some water. Found I wasn’t going to notice him in any way, and so
proceeded on his errand. When I say that George Hendryx was one of
the most valued friends I had in the regiment, this action on my part
will seem strange as indeed it is. Did not want to see him or any one
else I had ever seen before. Well, George came back a few moments
after, looked at me a short time and says: “I believe you are John L.
Ransom, Q. M. Sergt. of the same Co. with me, although you don’t seem
to recognize me.” Told him “I was that same person, recognized him
and there could be no mistake about it.” Wanted to know why in the
old harry I didn’t speak to him then. After telling him just how it
was, freezing to death, half starved and gray backs crawling all over
me, &c., we settled down into being glad to see one another.

Nov 23.—Having a few dollars of good yankee money which I have
hoarded since my capture, have purchased a large blank book and
intend as long as I am a prisoner of war in this confederacy, to note
down from day to day as occasion may occur, events as they happen,
treatment, ups and downs generally. It will serve to pass away the
time and may be interesting at some future time to read over.

Nov. 24.—Very cold weather. Four or five men chilled to death last
night. A large portion of the prisoners who have been in confinement
any length of time are reduced to almost skeletons from continued
hunger, exposure and filth. Having some money just indulged in an
extra ration of corn bread for which I paid twenty cents in yankee
script, equal to two dollars confederate money, and should say by the
crowd collected around that such a sight was an unusual occurrence,
and put me in mind of gatherings I have seen at the north around
some curiosity. We received for to-day’s food half a pint of rice
soup and one-quarter of a pound loaf of corn bread. The bread is
made from the very poorest meal, coarse, sour and musty; would make
poor feed for swine at home. The rice is nothing more than boiled in
river water with no seasoning whatever, not even salt, but for all
that it tasted nice. The greatest difficulty is the small allowance
given us. The prisoners are blue, downcast and talk continually of
home and something good to eat. They nearly all think there will be
an exchange of prisoners before long and the trick of it is to live
until the time approaches. We are divided off into hundreds with a
sergeant to each squad who draws the food and divides it up among
his men, and woe unto him if a man is wronged out of his share—his
life is not worth the snap of the finger if caught cheating. No
wood to-night and it is very cold. The nights are long and are made
hideous by the moans of suffering wretches.

Nov. 25.—Hendryx is in a very good tent with some nine or ten others
and is now trying to get me into the already crowded shelter. They
say I can have the first vacancy and as it is impossible for a dozen
to remain together long without losing some by sickness, my chances
will be good in a few days at fartherest. Food again at four o’clock.
In place of soup received about four ounces of salt horse, as we call
it.

Nov. 26.—Hendryx sacrificed his own comfort and lay out doors with
me last night and I got along much better than the night before. Are
getting food twice to-day; old prisoners say it is fully a third
more than they have been getting. Hardly understand how we could
live on much less. A Michigan man (could not learn his name) while
at work a few moments ago on the outside with a squad of detailed
yankees repairing a part of the embankment which recent rains had
washed away, stepped upon the wall to give orders to his men when
one of the guards shot him through the head, killing him instantly.
Lieut. Bossieux, commander of the prison, having heard the shot, came
to learn the cause. He told the guard he ought to be more careful
and not shoot those who were on parole and doing fatigue duty, and
ordered the body carried to the dead-house. Seems tough to me but
others don’t seem to mind it much. I am mad.

Nov. 27.—Stormy and disagreeable weather. From fifteen to twenty and
twenty-five die every day and are buried just outside the prison
with no coffins—nothing but canvas wrapped around them. Eight sticks
of four foot wood given every squad of one hundred men to-day, and
when split up and divided it amounted to nothing towards warming a
person. Two or three can put their wood together and boil a little
coffee made from bread crusts. The sick are taken out every morning
and either sent over to the city or kept in the hospital just outside
the prison and on the island. None admitted unless carried out in
blankets and so far gone there is not much chance of recovery.
Medical attendance is scarce.

Nov. 28.—Very cold and men suffer terribly with hardly any clothing
on some of them. A man taken outside to-day, bucked and gagged for
talking with a guard; a severe punishment this very cold weather.

Nov. 30.—Came across E. P. Sanders, from Lansing, Michigan, and a
jolly old soul is he. Can’t get discouraged where he is. Talk a great
deal about making our escape but there is not much prospect. We are
very strongly guarded with artillery bearing on every part of the
prison. The long bridge I have heard so much about crosses the river
just below the island. It is very long and has been condemned for
years—trains move very slow across it. There was a big fire over in
Richmond last night about 2 o’clock; could hear all the fire bells
and see the house tops covered with people looking at it. Great
excitement among the Johnny Rebs.

Dec. 1.—With no news concerning the great subject—exchange of
prisoners. Very hungry and am not having a good time of it. Take
it all around I begin to wish I had stayed at home and was at the
_Jackson Citizen_ office pulling the old press. Dream continually
nights about something good to eat; seems rather hard such plenty at
the North and starving here. Have just seen a big fight among the
prisoners; just like so many snarly dogs, cross and peevish. A great
deal of fighting going on. Rebels collect around on the outside in
crowds to see the Yankees bruise themselves and it is quite sport
for them. Have succeeded in getting into the tent with Hendryx.
One of the mess has been sent over to Richmond Hospital leaving a
vacancy which I am to fill. There are nine others, myself making ten.
The names are as follows: W. C. Robinson, orderly sergeant, 34th
Illinois; W. H. Mustard, hospital steward 100th Pennsylvania; Joe
Myers, 34th Illinois; H. Freeman, hospital steward 30th Ohio; C. G.
Strong, 4th Ohio cavalry; Corporal John McCarten, 6th Kentucky; U.
Kindred, 1st East Tennessee infantry; E. P. Sanders, 20th Michigan
infantry; George Hendryx and myself of the 9th Michigan cavalry. A
very good crowd of boys, and all try to make their places as pleasant
as possible. Gen. Neil Dow to-day came over from Libby Prison on
parole of honor to help issue some clothing that has arrived for
Belle Isle prisoners from the Sanitary Commission at the North.
Sergeant Robinson taken outside to help Gen. Dow in issuing clothing
and thinks through his influence to get more out for the same
purpose. A man froze to death last night where I slept. The body lay
until nearly dark before it was removed. My blanket comes in good
play, and it made the boys laugh when I told how I got it. We tell
stories, dance around, keep as clean as we can without soap and make
the best of a very bad situation.

Dec. 2.—Pleasant weather and favorable for prisoners. At about nine
in the morning the work of hunting for vermin commences, and all
over camp sit the poor starved wretches, nearly stripped, engaged
in picking off and killing the big gray backs. The ground is fairly
alive with them, and it requires continual labor to keep from being
eaten up alive by them. I just saw a man shot. He was called down
to the bank by the guard, and as he leaned over to do some trading
another guard close by shot him through the side and it is said
mortally wounded him. It was made up between the guards to shoot the
man, and when the lieutenant came round to make inquiries concerning
the affair, one of them remarked that the —— passed a counterfeit
bill on him the night before, and he thought he would put him where
he could not do the like again. The wounded man was taken to the
hospital and has since died. His name was Gilbert. He was from New
Jersey. Food twice to-day; buggy bean soup and a very small allowance
of corn bread. Hungry all the time.

Dec. 3.—Rumors of exchange to be effected soon. Rebels say we
will all be exchanged before many days. It cannot be possible our
government will allow us to remain here all winter. Gen. Dow is still
issuing clothing, but the rebels get more than our men do of it.
Guards nearly all dressed in Yankee uniforms. In our mess we have
established regulations, and any one not conforming with the rules
is to be turned out of the tent. Must take plenty of exercise, keep
clean, free as circumstances will permit of vermin, drink no water
until it has been boiled, which process purifies and makes it more
healthy, are not to allow ourselves to get despondent, and must talk,
laugh and make as light of our affairs as possible. Sure death for a
person to give up and lose all ambition. Received a spoonful of salt
to-day for the first time since I came here.

Dec. 4.—Exchange news below par to-day. Rather colder than yesterday;
a great many sick and dying off rapidly. Rebel guards are more strict
than usual, and one risks his life by speaking to them at all. Wrote
a letter home to-day, also one to a friend in Washington. Doubtful
whether I ever hear from them. Robinson comes inside every night and
always brings something good. We look forward to the time of his
coming with pleasure. Occasionally he brings a stick of wood which we
split up fine and build a cheerful fire in our little sod fireplace,
sit up close together and talk of home and friends so far away. We
call our establishment the “Astor House of Belle Isle.” There are so
many worse off than we are that we are very well contented and enjoy
ourselves after a fashion.

Dec. 5.—Cold and raw weather with no wood. Men are too weak to walk
nights to keep warm, sink down and chill to death. At least a dozen
were carried out this morning feet foremost. Through Robinson’s
influence Hendryx and myself will go out to-morrow to issue clothing,
and will come in nights to sleep. We are to receive extra rations
for our services. In good spirits to-night with a good fire and very
comfortable for this place.

Dec. 6.—One month a prisoner to-day—longer than any year of my life
before. Hope I am not to see another month in the Confederacy. A
great deal of stealing going on among the men. There are organized
bands of raiders who do pretty much as they please. A ration of bread
is often of more consequence than a man’s life. Have received food
but once to-day; very cold; at least one hundred men limping around
with frozen feet, and some of them crying like little children. Am at
work on the outside to-day; go out at nine in the morning and return
at four in the afternoon, and by right smart figuring carry in much
extra food for tent mates, enough to give all hands a good square
meal.

Dec. 7.—No news of importance. The rebels say a flag of truce boat
has arrived at City Point and Commissioner Olds telegraphed for and
undoubtedly will agree upon terms for an exchange of prisoners. Men
receiving boxes from their friends at the north and am writing for
one myself without much hope of ever getting it.

Dec. 8.—The men all turned out of the enclosure and are being
squadded over. A very stormy and cold day; called out before
breakfast and nearly dark before again sent inside. Very muddy
and the men have suffered terribly, stand up all day in the cold
drizzling rain, with no chance for exercise and many barefooted. I
counted nine or ten who went out in the morning not able to get back
at night; three of the number being dead.

Dec 9.—Rumors that one thousand go off to-day to our lines and the
same number every day until all are removed. It was not believed
until a few moments ago the Lieutenant stepped upon the bank and
said that in less than a week we would all be home again, and such a
cheering among us; every man who could yell had his mouth stretched.
Persons who fifteen minutes ago could not rise to their feet are
jumping around in excitement, shaking hands with one another and
crying, “A general exchange! a general exchange!” All in good spirits
and we talk of the good dinners we will get on the road home. Food
twice to-day and a little salt.

Dec. 10.—Instead of prisoners going away five hundred more have come,
which makes it very crowded. Some are still confident we will go away
soon, but I place no reliance on rebel reports. Rather warmer than
usual, and the men busying themselves hunting vermin. A priest in the
camp distributing tracts. Men told him to bring bread; they want no
tracts. Exchange news has died away, and more despondent than ever. I
to-day got hold of a Richmond _Enquirer_ which spoke of bread riots
in the city, women running around the streets and yelling, “Peace or
bread!”

Dec. 11.—Was on guard last night over the clothing outside. Lieut.
Bossieux asked Corp. McCarten and myself to eat supper with him last
night, which we were very glad to do. Henry, the negro servant, said
to the lieutenant after we had got through eating: “I golly, masser,
don’t nebber ask dem boys to eat with us again, dey eat us out clean
gone;” and so we did eat everything on the table and looked for more.

Dec. 12.—At just daylight I got up and was walking around the prison
to see if any Michigan men had died through the night, and was just
in time to see a young fellow come out of his tent nearly naked
and deliberately walk up the steps that lead over the bank. Just
as he got on the top the guard fired; sending a ball through his
brain, and the poor fellow fell dead in the ditch. I went and got
permission to help pull him out. He had been sick for a number of
days and was burning up with fever, and no doubt deranged at the
time, else he would have known better than to have risked his life
in such a manner. His name was Perry McMichael, and he was from
Minnesota. Perhaps he is better off, and a much easier death than to
die of disease as he undoubtedly would in a few days, longer. The
work of issuing clothing slowly goes on. In place of Gen. Dow, Col.
Sanderson comes over on parole of honor; and is not liked at all. Is
of New York and a perfect tyrant; treats us as bad or worse than the
rebels themselves. Col. Boyd also comes occasionally and is a perfect
gentleman. Talked to me to-day concerning Sanderson’s movements, and
said if he got through to our lines should complain of him to the
authorities at Washington. He took down notes in his diary against
him.

Dec. 13.—Nothing of any importance to note down. The officers come
over from Richmond every day or two, and make a showing of issuing
clothing. The work goes on slowly, and it would seem that if clothing
was ever needed and ought to be issued, it is now; yet the officers
seem to want to nurse the job and make it last as long as possible.
Many cruelties are practiced, principally by the rebel sergeants. The
lieutenant does not countenance much cruelty, still he is very quick
tempered, and when provoked is apt to do some very severe things.
The Yankees are a hard crowd to manage; will steal anything, no
matter what, regardless of consequences. Still I don’t know as it is
any wonder, cooped up as they are in such a place, and called upon
to endure such privations. The death rate gradually increases from
day to day. A little Cincinnati soldier died to-day. Was captured
same time as myself, and we had messed together a number of times
before I became identified with the “Astor House Mess.” Was in very
poor health when captured, but could never quite find out what ailed
him. I have many talks with the rebels, and am quite a priveleged
character. By so doing am able to do much for the boys inside, and
there are good boys in there, whom I would do as much for as myself.

Dec. 17.—I have plenty to eat. Go outside every day whether clothing
is issued or not. To explain the manner of issuing clothing: The men
are called outside by squads, that is, one squad of a hundred men at
a time; all stand in a row in front of the boxes of clothing. The
officer in charge, Col. Sanderson, begins with the first at the head
of the column, looks him over, and says to us paroled men: “Here,
give this man a pair of pants,” or coat, or such clothing as he may
stand in need of. In this way he gets through with a hundred men
in about half an hour. Us boys often manage to give three or four
articles where only one has been ordered. There seems to be plenty of
clothing here, and we can see no reason why it should not be given
away. Have to be very careful, though, for if we are caught at these
tricks are sent inside to stay. Officers stay on the island only
two or three hours, and clothe four or five hundred men, when they
could just as well do three or four times as much. It is comical the
notes that come in some of the good warm woolen stockings. These have
evidently been knit by the good mothers, wives and sisters at the
North, and some of the romantic sort have written letters and placed
inside, asking the receiver to let them know about himself, his
name, etc., etc. Most of them come from the New England states, and
they cheer the boys up a great deal.

Dec. 18.—To-day as a squad was drawn up in front of us, waiting
for clothing, I saw an Irishman in the ranks who looked familiar.
Looked at him for some time and finally thought I recognized in him
an old neighbor of mine in Jackson Michigan; one Jimmy Devers, a
whole souled and comical genius as ever it was my fortune to meet.
Went up to him and asked what regiment he belonged to; said he
belonged to the 23d Indiana, at which I could not believe it was my
old acquaintance. Went back to my work. Pretty soon he said to me:
“Ain’t you Johnny Ransom?” And then I knew I was right. He had lived
in Jackson, but had enlisted in an Indiana regiment. Well, we were
glad to see one another and you may just bet that Jimmy got as good
a suit of clothes as ever he had in our own lines. Jimmy is a case;
was captured on the 1st day of July at the Gettysburg battle, and
is consequently an old prisoner. Is very tough and hardy. Says the
Johnny Rebs have a big contract on their hands to kill him. But I
tell him to take good care of himself anyway, as there is no knowing
what he will be called upon to pass through yet.

Dec. 20.—James River frozen nearly over, and rebels say it has not
been so cold for years as at the present time. There are hundreds
with frozen feet, ears, hands &c., and laying all over the prison;
and the suffering is terrible. Hendryx and myself are intent on some
plan for escape. The lieutenant has spies who are on the watch.
The authorities know all about any conspiracy almost as soon as it
is known among ourselves. Last night just after dark two or three
Yankees agreed to give the guard $10 if he would let them get over
the bank, to which he promised; and as soon as they got nearly over
fired and immediately gave the alarm. One of them received a shot
in one of his legs and the others scrambled back over the bank; the
three minus their $10 bill and a sound leg. They cannot be trusted at
all and will promise anything for greenbacks. Sergt. Bullock of our
regiment is here and very sick with fever; cannot possibly live many
weeks in such a place as this. Col. Sanderson still issuing clothing,
but very unfair, and the men who need it most get none at all. All
the outsiders received a suit throughout to-day, myself among the
rest. Got a letter from home, everybody is well. They say keep up
good heart and we will be exchanged before many weeks.

Dec. 21.—Still cold. Have enough to eat myself, but am one of a
thousand. The scurvy is appearing among some of the men, and is
an awful disease—caused by want of vegetable diet, acids, &c. Two
small-pox cases taken to the hospital to-day. A sutler has been
established on the island and sells at the following rates: poor
brown sugar, $8 per pound; butter, $11; cheese, $10; sour milk $3 per
quart and the only article I buy; eggs, $10 per dozen; oysters, $6
per quart and the cheapest food in market.

Dec. 22.—A large mail came this morning, but nothing for me. A man
who gets a letter is besieged with questions, and a crowd gathers
around to learn the news, if any, regarding our future. Rations
smaller than usual, and Lieut. Bossieux says that it is either
exchange or starve with us prisoners sure, as they have not the food
to give us. To-day saw a copy of the Richmond Enquirer in which
was a long article treating on exchange of prisoners, saying our
government would not exchange owing to an excess held by us, and
unless their terms were agreed to, as they could not afford to keep
us, the coming summer would reduce our ranks so that they would not
have many to feed another winter. Rather poor prospects ahead for us
poor imprisoned yanks. Lots of Sanitary stores sent on to the island
for us, but as yet none have been issued, the rebels (officers in
particular), getting fat on what rightfully belongs to us.

Dec. 23.—Almost Christmas and we are planning for a Christmas dinner.
Very cold. The rebels are testing their big guns on the opposite
shore of the river and fairly shake the ground we stand on. We can
see the shells as they leave the guns until they explode, affording
quite a pastime for us watching their war machines. Militia in sight
drilling over in Richmond. A woman found among us—a prisoner of
war. Some one who knew the secret informed Lieutenant Bossieux and
he immediately had her taken outside, when she told him the whole
story—how she had “followed her lovyer a soldiering” in disguise, and
being of a romantic turn, enjoyed it hugely until the funny part was
done away with and Madame Collier, from East Tennessee, found herself
in durance vile; nothing to do but make the best of it and conceal
her sex if possible, hoping for a release, which, however, did not
come in the shape she wished. The lieutenant has sent her over to
Richmond to be cared for and she is to be sent north by the first
flag of truce boat. She tells of another female being among us, but
as yet she has not been found out.

Dec. 24.—Must hang up my stocking to-night for habit’s sake if
nothing else. I am enjoying splendid health, and prison life agrees
with me. Wrote home to-day.

Dec. 25—and Christmas.—One year ago to-day first went into camp at
Coldwater, little dreaming what changes a year would bring around,
but there are exchange rumors afloat and hope to see white folks
again before many months. All ordered out to be squadded over again,
which was quite a disappointment to our mess as we were making
preparations for a grand dinner, gotten up by outside hands, Mustard,
Myers, Hendryx and myself. However, we had our good things for
supper instead of dinner, and it was a big thing, consisting of corn
bread and butter, oysters, coffee, beef, crackers, cheese &c.; all
we could possibly eat or do away with, and costing the snug little
sum of $200 Confederate money, or $20 in greenbacks. Lay awake long
before daylight listening to the bells. As they rang out Christmas
good morning I imagined they were in Jackson, Michigan, my old home,
and from the spires of the old Presbyterian and Episcopal churches.
Little do they think as they are saying their Merry Christmases and
enjoying themselves so much, of the hunger and starving here. But
there are better days coming.

Dec. 26.—News of exchange and no officers over from Libby to
issue clothing. Extra quantity of wood. Rebels all drunk and very
domineering. Punish for the smallest kind of excuse. Some men
tunneled out of the pen but were retaken and were made to crawl
back through the same hole they went out of and the lieutenant kept
hitting them with a board as they went down and then ran back and
forward from one hole to the other and as they stuck up their heads
would hit them with a club, keeping them at it for nearly an hour. A
large crowd of both rebels and Yankees collected around to see the
fun.

Dec. 27.—Col. Sanderson and Col. Boyd came over this morning in a
great hurry and began to issue clothing very fast saying an exchange
had been agreed upon and they wanted to get rid of it before we all
went away. Pretty soon the news got inside and the greatest cheering,
yelling, shaking of hands and congratulating one another took place.
Just before dinner five hundred were taken out, counted and sent
away. Everybody anxious to go away first which of course they cannot
do. Sergts. Hight and Marks stand at the gate with big clubs keeping
order, letting them out two at a time, occasionally knocking a man
down and it is seldom he gets up again very soon. Some of the outside
went and the rest go to-morrow. It is a sure thing—a general exchange
and all will be sent away immediately. Everybody in good spirits.
Guess northern folks will be surprised to see such looking objects
come among them. They are the worst looking crowd I ever saw. Extra
ration of food and wood to-night and am anxiously waiting for the
morrow.

Dec. 28.—For some reason or other no more being taken away and more
despondent than ever. Very cold.

Dec. 29.—Nearly as cold weather as I ever saw at the North. All the
supplies brought by hand over the long bridge, owing to the river
being frozen over and not strong enough to hold up. Rebel officers
all drunk during the holidays. Snow an inch deep.

Dec. 30.—No rations issued yesterday to any of the prisoners and
a third of all here are on the very point of starvation. Lieut.
Bossieux sympathizes with us in word but says it is impossible to
help it as they have not the food for us. This is perhaps true as
regards edibles but there is no excuse for our receiving such small
supplies of wood. They could give us plenty of shelter, plenty of
wood and conveniences we do not now get if they felt so disposed.

Dec. 31.—Still very cold and no news encouraging. Rebels very strict.
One prisoner found a brother among the guards who had been living
in the south for a good many years and lately conscripted into the
Confederate army. New Year’s eve. Man wounded by the guard shooting,
and ball broke his leg. Might better have shot him dead for he
will surely die. Raw rice and corn bread issued to-day in small
quantities. Richmond _Enquirer_ spoke of the five hundred who left
here day before yesterday and they have reached Washington.




NEW YEAR’S DAY

  AND THE PLACE IT FINDS US.—APPLES TO EAT AND AN OLD COMRADE JOINS
  US.—MATTERS GETTING WORSE WITH OCCASIONAL RUMORS OF EXCHANGE, ETC.,
  ETC.


Jan. 1, 1864.—A great time this morning wishing one another a Happy
New Year. Robinson bought on the outside a dozen apples and gave us
all a treat. Nothing but corn bread to eat and very poor quality.
Dr. F. L. Lewis, Vet. Surg. 9th Mich. cavalry, came in to-day; was
captured at Dandridge, East Tennessee, where our regiment had a
severe engagement. Tells me all the news. Col. Acker wounded, etc.,
etc. Thinks it a queer New Year trip, but also thinks we will be
exchanged before many weeks.

Jan. 2.—Rebel congress about to meet, and the people of Richmond
demand through the papers that the prisoners confined here be removed
immediately, as there is hardly enough for themselves to eat, aside
from feeding us “Northern Hirelings.” Hear of bread riots and lots of
trouble across the river. A big fire last night in the vicinity of
Libby Prison.

Jan. 3.—Received a letter from Michigan. Not quite so cold, but
disagreeable weather. Nine men bucked and gagged at one time on the
outside, two of them for stealing sour beans from a swill-barrel.
They would get permission to pass through the gate to see the
lieutenant, and instead, would walk around the cook-house to some
barrels containing swill, scoop up their hats full and then run
inside; but they were caught, and are suffering a hard punishment for
it.

Jan. 4.—Some ladies visited the island to see us blue coats,
and laughed very much at our condition; thought it so comical
and ludicrous the way the prisoners crowded the bank next the
cook-house, looking over at the piles of bread, and compared us to
wild men, and hungry dogs. A chicken belonging to the lieutenant flew
up on the bank and was snatched off in short order, and to pay for it
we are not to receive a mouthful of food to-day, making five or six
thousand suffer for one man catching a little chicken.

Jan. 5.—Succeeded in getting Dr. Lewis into our tent; is rather under
the weather, owing to exposure and hardship. Jimmy Devers spends the
evenings with us and we have funny times talking over better days—and
are nearly talked out. I have said all I can think, and am just
beginning to talk it all over again. All our stories have been told
from two, to three or four times, and are getting stale. We offer a
reward for a good new story.

Jan. 6.—Still prisoners of war, without the remotest idea as to
how long we are to remain so. Some of the paroled Yankees on the
outside curse and treat the inside prisoners more cruel (when they
have a chance,) than the rebels themselves. Blass, a Spaniard, who
has been a prisoner over a year and refuses to be exchanged, is the
lieutenant’s right hand man. He tied up a man a few days ago for some
misdemeanor and whipped him. He is afraid to come inside, knowing he
would lose his life in a jiffy. He also raises the rebel flag at the
island mornings, and lowers it at night. It is a dirty rag, and the
appearance of it ought to disgust any sensible person.

Jan. 7.—Rainy, cold and disagreeable weather. Henry Stilson, a fellow
who was captured with me, was carried out dead this morning. He
was diseased when taken, and fell an easy prey to their cruelties.
A good deal of raiding is going on among the men. One Captain
Moseby commands a band of cut-throats who do nearly as they please,
cheating, robbing and knocking down—operating principally upon new
prisoners who are unacquainted with prison life. Moseby is named
after the rebel guerrilla, his real name being something else. He is
from New York City, and is a regular bummer.

Jan. 8.—All taken outside to-day to be squadded over—an all day job,
and nothing to eat. The men being in hundreds and some dying off
every day, leave vacancies in the squads of as many as die out of
them, and in order to keep them filled up have to be squadded over
every few days, thereby saving rations. Richmond papers are much
alarmed for fear of a break among the prisoners confined within the
city. It is said there are six hundred muskets secreted among the
Belle Islanders. The citizens are frightened almost to death, double
guards are placed over us, and very strict orders issued to them.

Jan. 9.—A signal light suspended over the island all last night
for some reason unknown to the men confined here. We are cautioned
against approaching within eight or ten feet from the bank. One of
the raiders went through a man who lay near the bank and started to
run after robbing him. A guard who saw the whole affair shot the
villain dead and was applauded by all who knew of the affair. Fifteen
or twenty carried out this morning dead and thirty or forty nearly so
in blankets.

Jan. 10.—A brass band over to-day giving us a tune. Looks more like a
wandering tribe of vagabonds than musicians. Discoursed sweet music,
such as “Bonnie Blue Flag,” “The Girl I Left Behind Me,” and for
their pains got three groans from their enemies in limbo. Dying off
very fast on the island.

Jan. 11.—A steady rain for twenty-four hours, and have not been dry
during the time. However it is a warm rain and get along very well.
We are still issuing clothing but very slow. About one hundred per
day get partly clothed up. No news of exchange. Abe Lincoln reported
dead. Papers very bitter on Beast Butler, as they call him. Manage
by a good deal of skirmishing to get the papers almost every day
in which we read their rebel lies. A plan afoot for escape, but am
afraid to say anything of the particulars for fear of my diary being
taken away from me. As I came inside to-night with some bread in my
haversack some fellows who were on the watch pitched into me and
gobbled my saved up rations. I don’t care for myself for I have been
to supper, but the boys in the tent will have to go without anything
to eat for this night. It don’t matter much—they are all hungry and
it did them as much good as it would our mess.

Jan. 12.—James River very high. A continual roar in our ears caused
by the water falling over the cataract just above the island. Rebels
fired a large shell over the prison to scare us.

Jan. 15.—Everything runs along about the same. Little excitements
from day to day. The weather is fair, and taken all together thus
far this winter has been very favorable to us as prisoners. Lieut.
Bossieux lost his dog. Some Yanks snatched him into a tent and eat
him up. Bossieux very mad and is anxious to know who the guilty ones
are. All he can do is to keep all our rations from us one day, and he
does it. Seems pretty rough when a man will eat a dog, but such is
the case.

Jan. 18.—Too much exertion to even write in my diary. Talk of getting
away by escaping, but find no feasible plan. Rebs very watchful. Some
mail to-day but nothing for me. Saw some papers, and a new prisoner
brought with him a New York paper, but not a word in it about
“exchange.” Am still outside most every day. Geo. Hendryx at work in
the cook-house cooking rations for the prisoners. Comes down where I
am every day and hands me something to take inside for the boys. He
tells the Lieut. he has a brother inside that he is feeding. Although
it is against orders, Lieut. Bossieux pays no attention to it.

Jan. 20.—Rebel officers over to-day inspecting us Yanks. Some of the
worst looking Arabs in shape of officers I ever saw. Jimmy Devers
comes to our tent every night and sits with us until bed time. Is
a jolly chap and keeps us all in good spirits with his sayings.
Sergt. Robinson, I learned to-day, instead of being a sergeant is a
lieutenant. His whole company being captured, he preferred to go with
them and share their trials, than go with the officers. The men are
very much attached to him and no wonder, as he is a fine fellow. His
home is in Sterling, Whiteside Co., Illinois. Corp. McCartin is, as
his name would indicate, an Irishman, and his home is Louisville,
Ky. Is a shoemaker by trade. He is also a Mason, and I am going to
write down wherein the fact of his being a Mason has brought good
into the camp to-day. The boys feeling rather more hungry than usual
were rather despondent, when the corporal gets up and says: “Boys,
I’ll go and get something to eat.” Went out of the tent and in twenty
minutes came back with three or four pounds of bacon and two loaves
of corn bread. We were surprised and asked how he had performed the
miracle. Told us then that he was a Mason, as also was the lieutenant
in charge, from whom the food came. We decided then and there that
the first opportunity that presented itself we would join the Masons.
Can see the rebels drilling across the river.

Jan. 22.—Cold and clear weather. Nothing to write to-day. It’s a task.

Jan. 24.—We are all troubled with heart-burn, sour stomach, &c. Drink
weak lye made from ashes for it. Every day some new ones come inside,
but they know nothing as to the prospects of our being exchanged.
All are considerably surprised to find themselves in quite so bad
a place, and the subject of prison life begins to interest them.
Good deal of gambling going on among prisoners. Chuck-a-luck is the
favorite game. You lay your ration of bread down on a figure on a
board, and a fellow with a dice-box shakes it up a little, throws out
the dice, and your bread is gone. Don’t understand the game myself.
That’s all I ever saw of the game. Lay down the bread and it’s gone.
Rather a one sided affair. Some men are very filthy, which makes it
disagreeable for those of more cleanly habits. I believe that many,
very many, who now die, would live if they adopted the rules that our
mess has, and lived up to them. It is the only way to get along.

Jan. 25.—Being in this place brings out a man for just what he is
worth. Those whom we expect the most from in the way of braving
hardships and dangers, prove to be nobody at all. And very often
those whom we expect the least from prove to be heroes every inch
of them. Notably one of these is George Hendryx, who is nothing but
a good looking, effeminate boy, fit, you would say, to be going to
school with a mother to look after him, and for not much else. But
instead, he is brave, cheerful, smart, watching every chance to get
the best of the Johnny Rebs. His position in the cook-house has given
him a chance to feed, I presume, hundreds of men. Near the cook-house
is a store-house, and in it are several hogsheads of hams. These
hams were sent from the Sanitary Commission at the North for Union
prisoners, but they for whom they were intended do not get them, and
they are being eaten up by the rebels. Hendryx has managed to get
up a board in the cook-house floor, where he can crawl fifteen or
twenty feet under the store-house and up through that floor. By this
Yankee trick he has stolen, I presume one hundred hams and gotten
them inside where they belong. This is very risky on his part, for
should he be discovered it would go very hard with him. He is about
as unselfish a fellow as you can well find. This is only one of his
plans to outwit the rebels for our benefit. His head is all the
time, too, planning some way of escape. Well, we all hope he won’t
get caught. All shake in our boots for him. Was on guard last night,
outside, over the clothing. There is so much clothing stole by the
rebels that Bossieux put a guard of two over the boxes through the
night, and if any of the Rebs. come around to steal we are instructed
to wake up the lieutenant, who sleeps near by in a tent. I was on
duty last night with Joe Myers, and Hendryx came where we were and
unfolded a plan for escape which he has been working up. It is a
risky affair, and had best be thought over pretty thorough before
put into execution. Robinson has been found out as a lieutenant,
and taken over to Richmond to be placed with the officers in Libby
Prison. We are sorry that we must lose him.

Jan. 26.—Ninety-two squads of prisoners confined on less than six
acres of ground—one hundred in a squad, making nine thousand and two
hundred altogether. The lice are getting the upper hand of us. The
ground is literally covered with them. Bean soup to-day and is made
from the following recipe, (don’t know from what cook book, some
new edition): Beans are very wormy and musty. Hard work finding a
bean without from one to three bugs in it. They are put into a large
caldron kettle of river water and boiled for a couple of hours. No
seasoning, not even salt put into them. It is then taken out and
brought inside. Six pails full for each squad—about a pint per man,
and not over a pint of beans in each bucket. The water is hardly
colored and I could see clear through to the bottom and count every
bean in the pail. The men drink it because it is warm. There is not
enough strength or substance in it to do any good. We sometimes have
very good bean soup when they have meat to boil with it.

Jan. 27.—More prisoners came to-day and say there is to be no
general exchange during the war, and we are to be sent off into
Georgia immediately. Stormy and disagreeable weather and everybody
down-hearted. Very still among the men, owing to the bad news—hardly
a word spoken by anybody. The least bit off anything encouraging
would change the stillness into a perfect bedlam. I this morning
looked into a tent where there were seventeen men and started back
frightened at the view inside. What a tableau for a New York theatre?
They were all old prisoners nearly naked, very dirty and poor, some
of them sick lying on the cold ground with nothing under or over
them, and no fire; had just been talking over the prospect ahead
and all looked the very picture of dispair, with their hollow eyes,
sunken cheeks and haggard expression. I have before imagined such
scenes but never before realized what they were until now. And such
is but a fair sample of hundreds of men fully as bad.

Jan. 28.—No officers over from Libby for a few days past. Nearly
all the clothing issued. A few days more will close up the clothing
business, and then probably all the outsiders will be sent inside;
and for fear such will be the case we have decided upon to-morrow
night for the escape (which I have not said much about in my diary).
The nights are dark and cloudy. Messrs. Mustard and Hendryx both
sleep outside now, and I must manage to, both to-night and to-morrow
night. I have been two weeks trying to get a map of Virginia, and
have at last succeeded. A negro brought it to me from the city. It
has cost over thirty dollars Confederate money—at the North would
have cost twenty-five cents. I would not take for it, unless I could
get another one, one thousand dollars in gold. We are well rigged,
have some food saved up to take along; in good health and determined
to get away. Lieut. Bossieux suspects, and to-day took the pains to
say in our hearing that he knew an escape among the outsiders was in
view, and as sure as there was a God in heaven if we tried it and got
caught, and we surely would be, he would first shoot all he could
before catching us, and the balance would be tied up and whipped
every day until he got tired, as long as we lived. We must expect
trouble. It does not change us in the least; if anything, makes us
the more determined to get away. To-night we are to start, and I
will write down the plans we have, running the risk of the rebels
getting hold of it. At a few moments past eleven and before midnight
the guard will let us cross his beat and go to the water’s edge.
We all have rebel clothing which we are to wear, furnished partly
by a negro, and partly by the guard who helps us off. We take the
quarter-master’s boat, which we unlock, and having been furnished the
countersign give it to the picket who will pretend that he thinks we
are rebel guards going over to the city, in case we are caught, which
will screen him in a measure. Having passed him, we get into the boat
and row across the river, give the countersign to the guards on the
other side of the river, and talk with them a little, being ourselves
posted on general information regarding the place. To quiet their
suspicions if they have any, we then start up into the town and when
out of sight of the guards take a turn to the left, and go straight
to the Richmond jail; taking care to avoid patrols &c. We will then
meet with a negro who will guide us ten miles up the river, and
then leave us in charge of friendly blacks who will keep us through
the next day and at night pilot us farther along toward our lives.
If possible, I shall steal the rebel flag, which is kept nights in
the lieutenant’s tent, and a few other relics, to take along with
me. The big bell in Richmond strikes six, and we close our diary,
hoping never to look upon it again until we return to free our fellow
prisoners, with the glorious army of the North. Now we leave our
diary to finish preparations for the flight for freedom. May God aid
us in this land of tyranny, where we have met nothing but suffering.
Good bye, Belle Isle and Prison. Hail! Freedom, Home, Friends, and
the Grand Army of the Old Flag! What is in store for us in the
future?

Feb. 5.—Have been reading over the last few pages of my diary. It
sounds well, but the rebel flag still floats over Belle Isle. Our
escapade was a grand fizzle, and all hands have been punished in more
ways than one in the last few days. Bossieux suspected something
going on among us and had us secretly watched, and long before we
had made a move toward fulfilling our projected plans we were thrown
into a guard house on the island; next morning taken out of it, and
underwent a severe cross-questioning. He found our rebel clothing,
food we had packed, found the lock to the boat broke, and numerous
other signs of an abandonment. Well, the result has been that we were
bucked and gagged twice a day for an hour each time, and for four
hours each of us carried a big stick of wood up and down in front of
the gate, a guard to prick us with his bayonet if we walked too slow
to suit him. Then Hendryx has been strung up by the thumbs. Nights we
have been thrown into a damp, cold guard house to shiver all night.
Every day now for six days we have walked with our sticks of wood
so many hours per day, and last night were turned inside with all
the prisoners to stay, Bossieux says, till we _rot_, he can place no
dependence in us.

Feb. 6.—We have to laugh over our trials and tribulations. Where we
had plenty a week ago, plenty of exercise, and many favors, we are
now right where we were at first, fareing just as the rest, with no
favors shown us. It’s all right, we can stand it just as well as the
rest. We have never belittled ourselves in the least in our dealings
with the rebels. Bossieux told us himself, as we came inside, that
he didn’t blame us in the least for trying to get away, but he was
obliged to punish us for the attempt. Hendryx says that he will be
out again in three days.

Feb. 8.—Butler reported as commissioner on exchange and the rebels
declare that they would never recognize him and would rather that we
should all die here than negotiate with the Beast. Congress still
in session over in the city and we watch the papers eagerly for
something relative to us. The Holy Sabbath day and the church bells
ringing for morning service. Don’t think I shall attend this morning;
it is such a long walk and then I look so bad; have nothing fit to
wear. A man stabbed a few minutes ago by his tent mate, killing him
instantly. They had all along been the best friends until a dispute
arose, and one of them drew a knife and killed his comrade. Strong
talk of lynching the murderer. Have not heard the particulars. Corp.
McCartin is missing from the island and am confident from what I
have seen that he has escaped and by the help of Lieut. Bossieux. No
endeavors are being made to look him up, still he offers a reward for
his apprehension. They are both members of the secret craft.

Feb. 9.—Great news this morning. A raid is being made on Richmond
by Kilpatrick. Rebels manning their forts in sight of us. All are
at work, women, children, in fact everybody who can shovel. No cars
running over the big bridge. Double guards placed over us and the
greatest activity prevails among them. It is really amusing to see
them flying around and many are the jokes at their expense. All
business is suspended in Richmond; no papers issued, and everybody
with their guns or working utensils. Brass bands are playing their
best to encourage the broken down Confederacy. A portion of the
congress came over this afternoon to take a look at us, among whom
were Davis, Benjamin and Howell Cobb. They are a substantial looking
set of men and of the regular southern cut. The broad brim hats, gold
headed canes and aristocratic toss of the head, alone would tell
who they were. They are a proud, stern set of men and look as if
they would like to brush us out of existence. Still we are not going
to be brushed out so easy and they found men among us who were not
afraid to stare, or hold our heads as high as their lordships. A band
accompanied them and played the Bonnie Blue Flag, which was hissed
and groaned at by the Yankees, and in return a thousand voices sang
Yankee Doodle, very much to their discomfiture.

Feb. 10.—The hospital signal lights suspended over the island all
night in order to direct the batteries where to aim their pieces
in case of an outbreak which is greatly feared. Rockets sent up at
intervals during the night over Richmond. Reported that there are six
hundred muskets secreted among the prisoners and citizens very much
alarmed and afraid of us. I hope there is but cannot believe it. It
is impossible for me to sleep and I lay awake thinking how we are
situated and wondering how long the play is to last.

Feb. 11.—Cold and pleasant. A good deal of fighting going on among
us—a discontented set of beings; just like so many hungry wolves
penned up together. Rebels still at work fortifying all around
Richmond. A number of Yankees have been taken out on parole of
honor to work building breastworks etc., but a very few will go and
it is considered a great crime among us to work for them. Have
they forgotten our existence at the North? It seems as if we were
neglected by our government but will not judge them hastily until we
know more. There are perhaps sufficient reasons for our remaining
here. Very strongly guarded, nevertheless we talk of escape and are
all the while building air castles.

Feb. 12.—Lieut. Bossieux has sent a squad of men from the island
composed of runaways over to Castle Thunder to remain during the war
as hostages, among whom were our friends Myers and Mustard. I never
expect to see them again.

Feb. 13.—Very cold. The rebels are again settling down and getting
over their scare. Not much to eat now and the men more disheartened
than ever. A rebel preacher delivered us a sermon of two hours
length from a dry goods box. He was listened to attentively and made
the remark before closing that he didn’t know as he was doing any
good talking to us. It was like casting pearls before swine and he
would close his remarks, to which a Yankee told him he might have
stopped long ago if he had wanted to; no one would have made any
objections. Was told that six hundred are to start for Georgia to-day
and subsequently six hundred every day until all are removed from
Richmond. Lieut. Bossieux says it is so but there is going to be an
exchange of sick in a few days and all outside hands shall be sent
north with them.

Feb. 14.—Had quite an adventure last night with the raiders. One of
Capt. Moseby’s robbers was trying to steal a blanket from our tent
by reaching through the tent opening when Dad (E. P. Sanders), who
is always awake, threw a brick hitting him on the arm, breaking the
brick, and as he jumped, halloed to us, “Come boys, let’s catch the
rascal,” and out of the door he went. Dr. and myself nobly rushed to
the rescue and reached the door just in time to see Dad turn a short
corner way up the street and close on to the heels of Mr. Robber,
but he slipped and fell and the thief got away. Were soon snugly
ensconced in bed once more congratulating ourselves on losing nothing
as we thought. But on getting up this morning I found my shoes gone
and am barefoot in the middle of winter. However I can get more and
have no fear on that score. Six hundred sent away to-day, some say
to our lines while others think to Georgia. Rebels say to our lines,
and that a general exchange has been agreed upon. Great excitement
among the men. Evening.—Lieut. Bossieux called me outside just before
night and told me he was called upon to furnish some hostages to be
sent to Charleston to be kept during the war, and had decided to
send Hendryx and myself, with some others. Said it was better to
send those who were always trying to get away. Have succeeded in
buying a pair of shoes, which, although about four sizes too large,
are much better than none. Thanks to the Sanitary Commission I have
good woolen stockings, under clothing complete, and am otherwise well
dressed. Six hundred sent away this afternoon under a very strong
guard, which does not look like an exchange.

Feb. 17.—Still on the island. Another squad taken out yesterday. It
will not be our turn to go for some days, even if six hundred are
taken out every day. Have not been sent for as hostages yet. Hendryx
and myself have decided to flank out and go with the next that go, no
matter where their destination may be. If we don’t get away, with a
ghost of a chance, then it will be funny.

Feb. 20.—All sorts of rumors afloat, but still we stay here. Strange
officers come over and look at us. Bossieux away considerable, and
something evidently up. Anything for a change. My health is good, and
tough as a bear.

Feb. 23.—None have been taken away from the island for a number of
days. Have heard that a box came for me, and is over in Richmond.
Hope the rebel that eats the contents of that box will get choked
to death. I wrote to the Governor of Michigan, Austin Blair, who is
in Washington, D. C., some weeks ago. He has known me from boyhood.
Always lived in the neighborhood at Jackson, Mich. Asked him to
notify my father and brothers of my whereabouts. To-day I received a
letter from him saying that he had done as requested, also that the
Sanitary Commission had sent me some eatables. This is undoubtedly
the box which I have heard from and is over in Richmond. Rebels are
trying to get recruits from among us for their one-horse Confederacy.
Believe that one or two have deserted our ranks and gone over. Bad
luck to them.




PEMERTON BUILDING.

  A GOOD-BYE TO BELLE ISLE—GOOD PLACE TO BE MOVED FROM—ASTOR HOUSE
  MESS ON ITS TRAVELS—NEW SCENES—THE RAID ON RICHMOND AND CONSEQUENT
  SCARE—ALL’S WELL IF IT ENDS WELL—MEN SHOT, ETC., ETC.


PEMERTON BUILDING, Richmond, Va., Feb. 24.—We are confined on the
third floor of the building, which is a large tobacco warehouse. Was
removed from the island yesterday. Was a warm day and it was a long
walk. Came across the “long bridge,” and it is a long bridge. Was
not sorry to bid adieu to Belle Isle. Were searched last night but
our mess has lost nothing, owing to the following process we have of
fooling them: One of the four manages to be in the front part of the
crowd and is searched first, and is then put on the floor underneath
and we let our traps down through a crack in the floor to him, and
when our turn comes we have nothing about us worth taking away. The
men so ravenous when the rations were brought in, that the boxes of
bread and tubs of poor meat were raided upon before dividing, and
consequently some had nothing to eat at all, while others had plenty.
Our mess did not get a mouthful and have had nothing to eat since
yesterday afternoon, and it is now nearly dark. The lice are very
thick. You can see them all over the floors, walls, &c., in fact
everything literally covered with them; they seem much larger than
the stock on Belle Isle and a different species. We talk of escape
night and day—and are nearly crazy on the subject. No more news
about exchange. Papers state that Richmond is threatened, and that
Kilpatrick’s cavalry is making a raid on the place for the purpose of
releasing us and burning the town. Unusual bustle among them.

[Illustration: George W. Hendryx.]

Feb. 25.—We divide the night up into four watches and take turns
standing guard while the other three sleep, to protect ourselves from
Captain Moseby’s gang of robbers. We are all armed with iron slats
pulled off the window casings. They are afraid to pitch in to us, as
we are a stout crowd and would fight well for our worldly goods. We
expect to take it before long. They are eyeing us rather sharp, and I
guess will make an attack to-night. Very long days and more lonesome
than when on the island. Got rations to-day, and the allowance did
not half satisfy our hunger.

Feb. 26.—Rather cold, almost spring. Guards unusually strict. Hendryx
was standing near the window, and I close by him, looking at the
high, ten story tobacco building, when the guard fired at us. The
ball just grazed Hendryx’s head and lodged in the ceiling above; all
we could do to prevent Hendryx throwing a brick at the guard.

Feb. 27.—Organizing the militia; hauling artillery past the prison.
Have a good view of all that is going on. Bought a compass from one
of the guards for seven dollars, greenbacks; worth half a dollar at
home. It is already rumored among the men that we have a compass, a
map of Virginia, a preparation to put on our feet to prevent dogs
from tracking us, and we are looked up to as if we were sons of Irish
lords in disguise, and are quite noted personages. Cold last night,
and we suffer much in not having blankets enough to keep us warm.
The walls are cold and damp, making it disagreeable, and the stench
nearly makes us sick. It is impossible for a person to imagine prison
life until he has seen and realized it. No news of importance. Time
passes much more drearily than when on Belle Isle. Were all searched
again to-day but still keep my diary, although expecting to lose it
every day; would be quite a loss, as the longer I write and remain
a prisoner the more attached am I to my record of passing events.
A man shot for putting his head out of the window. Men all say it
served him right, for he had no business to thus expose himself
against strict orders to the contrary. We are nearly opposite and not
more than twenty rods from Libby Prison, which is a large tobacco
warehouse. Can see plenty of union officers, which it is a treat to
look at. Hendryx had a fight with the raiders—got licked. He ain’t so
pretty as he was before, but knows more. I am very wise about such
matters, consequently retain my beauty.

Feb. 28.—Had the honor (?) of seeing Jefferson Davis again and part
of his congress to-day. They visited Libby and we were allowed to
look out of the windows to see them as they passed in and out of the
building. Strut around like chickens with frozen feet. David Benjamin
walked with the President and is a much better looking man. Prisoners
were notified that if they made any insulting remarks they would be
fired at. Have no more exalted opinion of them than before.

Feb. 29.—Excitement among the Johnnies—flying around as if the Yankee
army were threatening Richmond. Cannot learn what the commotion is,
but hope it is something that will benefit us. LATER: The occasion of
the excitement among the rebels is that Dahlgreen is making a raid on
Richmond, acting in conjunction with Kilpatrick, for the purpose of
liberating prisoners. We are heavily guarded and not allowed to look
out of the windows, nevertheless we manage to see about all there is
going on.

Feb. 30.—Rebels in hot water all night and considerably agitated.
Imagined we could hear firing during the night. This morning small
squads of tired out union soldiers marched by our prison under guard,
evidently captured through the night. Look as if they was completely
played out. Go straggling by sometimes not more than half a dozen at
a time. Would give something to hear the news. We are all excitement
here. Negroes also go by in squads sometimes of hundreds in charge of
overseers, and singing their quaint negro melodies. It is supposed
by us that the negroes work on the fortifications, and are moved
from one part of the city to another, for that purpose. Our troops
have evidently been repulsed with considerable loss. We hear that
Dahlgreen has been shot and killed. At the very first intimation that
our troops were anywhere near, the prisoners would have made a break.

March 1.—Working along towards Spring slowly. A dead calm after the
raid scare. We much prefer the open air imprisonment to confinement.
Have considerable trouble with the thieves which disgrace the name
of union soldier. Are the most contemptible rascals in existence.
Often walk up to a man and coolly take his food and proceed to eat
it before the owner. If the victim resists then a fight is the
consequence, and the poor man not only loses his food but gets licked
as well.

March 2.—The food we get here is poor, water very good, weather
outside admirable, vermin still under control and the “Astor House
Mess” flourishing. We are all in good health with the exception of
Dr. Lewis, who is ailing. I was never tougher—seems as if your
humble servant was proof against the hardest rebel treatment. No
exchange news. Trade and dicker with the guards and work ourselves
into many luxuries, or rather work the luxuries into ourselves.
Have become quite interested in a young soldier boy from Ohio named
Bill Havens. Is sick with some kind of fever and is thoroughly bad
off. Was tenderly brought up and well educated I should judge. Says
he ran away from home to become a drummer. Has been wounded twice,
in numerous engagements, now a prisoner of war and sick. Will try
and keep track of him. Every nationality is here represented and
from every branch of the service, and from all parts of the world.
There are smart men here and those that are not so smart, in fact a
conglomeration of humanity—hash, as it were.

March 3.—The ham given us to-day was rotten, with those nameless
little white things crawling around through it. Promptly threw it out
of the window and was scolded for it by a fellow prisoner who wanted
it himself. Shall never become hungry enough to eat poor meat. Guards
careless with their guns. An old man shot in the arm. Hendryx tried
to pull a brick out of the casing to throw at the shooter. Barbarians
these rebs.

March 4.—And now we are getting ready to move somewhere, the Lord
only knows where. One good thing about their old prisons, we are
always ready for a change. Have made many new acquaintances while
here in Pemberton, and some agreeable ones; my boy Havens has fever
and chills. Is rather better to-day. It is said we move to-night.
Minnesota Indians confined here, and a number of sailors and marines.
I am quite a hand to look at men, sometimes for hours, and study them
over, then get to talking with them and see how near I was right
in my conjectures. Its almost as good as reading books. The Astor
House Mess is now composed of but four members, E. P. Sanders, F. L.
Lewis, Geo. W. Hendryx and myself; we still adhere to our sanitary
regulations and as a consequence are in better health than a majority
of those here. Sanders may be said to be at the head of the mess,
(we call him Dad,) while Lewis is a sort of moderator and advisor,
with Hendryx and myself as the rank and file. Are quite attached to
one another, and don’t believe that either one would steal from the
other. I certainly wouldn’t take anything short of pumpkin pie or
something of that sort. Of course a man would steal pie, at least
we all say so, and Lewis even declares he would steal dough cakes
and pancakes such as his wife used to make. We are all well dressed,
thanks to the Sanitary Commission and our own ingenuity in getting
what was intended for us to have. False alarm of fire.


Routed at Midnight.

ON THE CARS, March 7, 1864.—We were roused from our gentle slumbers
during the night, counted off and marched to the cars, loaded
into them, which had evidently just had some cattle as occupants.
Started southward to some portion of Georgia, as a guard told us.
Passed through Petersburg, and other towns which I could not learn
the names of. Cars run very slow, and being crowded, we are very
uncomfortable—and hungry. Before leaving Richmond hard-tack was
issued to us in good quantity for the Confederacy. Have not much
chance to write. Bought some boiled sweet potatoes of the guard,
which are boss. The country we pass through is a miserable one.
Guards watch us close to see that none escape, and occasionally a
Yank is shot, but not in our car. Seems as if we did not run over
thirty or forty miles per day. Stop for hours on side tracks, waiting
for other trains to pass us.

March 8.—Were unloaded last night and given a chance to straighten
our limbs. Stayed all night in the woods, side of the track, under a
heavy guard. Don’t know where we are, as guards are very reticent.

March 10.—Still traveling, and unloaded nights to sleep by the track.
Rebel citizens and women improve every opportunity to see live
Yankees. Are fed passably well. Lewis feeling poorly. Watch a chance
to escape but find none.

March 13.—Ran very slow through the night, and are in the vicinity of
Macon, Ga. Will reach our prison to-night. Received a pone of corn
bread apiece weighing about two pounds, which is liberal on their
part. Two more days such riding as this would kill me. The lice are
fairly eating us up alive, having had no chance to rid ourselves
of them since leaving Richmond. One of the guards struck Hendryx
during the night. We were talking on the all important subject, and
the guard hearing us chatting away to ourselves struck over into the
crowd where the noise came from and hit George in the back part of
the head. He didn’t speak for a minute or two and I was afraid it had
killed him, which happily proved to the contrary. As soon as it came
daylight he showed the brute where he had struck him, and took the
occasion to dress him down a little, whereupon the rebel threatened
that if he said another word to him he would blow his head off. A
drizzling rain has set in.

[Illustration: (U.S. flag)]




ANDERSONVILLE.

  ARRIVAL AT THE WORST OF ALL PRISONS—BEGINNING OF A SUMMER THAT
  KILLED THIRTEEN THOUSAND MEN—BAD WATER, BAD FOOD, AND MOST INHUMAN
  TREATMENT—IN THE CLUTCHES OF WIRTZ AND HIS PICKED OUT REBEL
  AIDS—THE TRUTH AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH—A SEASON OF INTENSE
  SUFFERING.


CAMP SUMPTER, Andersonville, Ga., March 14.—Arrived at our
destination at last and a dismal hole it is, too. We got off the
cars at two o’clock this morning in a cold rain, and were marched
into our pen between a strong guard carrying lighted pitch pine
knots to prevent our crawling off in the dark. I could hardly walk
have been cramped up so long, and feel as if I was a hundred years
old. Have stood up ever since we came from the cars, and shivering
with the cold. The rain has wet us to the skin and we are worn out
and miserable. Nothing to eat to-day, and another dismal night just
setting in.

March 15.—At about midnight I could stand up no longer, and lay
down in the mud and water. Could hardly get up. Shall get food this
morning, and after eating shall feel better. There is a good deal
to write about here, but I must postpone it until some future time,
for I can hardly hold a pencil now. LATER: Have drawn some rations
which consisted of nearly a quart of corn-meal, half a pound of beef,
and some salt. This is splendid. I have just partaken of a delicious
repast and feel like a different person. Dr. Lewis is discouraged and
thinks he cannot live long in such a place as this.

March 16.—The prison is not yet entirely completed. One side is yet
open, and through the opening two pieces of artillery are pointed.
About 1800 Yankees are here now. Col. Piersons commands the prison,
and rides in and talks with the men. Is quite sociable, and says
we are all to be exchanged in a few weeks. He was informed that
such talk would not go down any longer. We had been fooled enough,
and paid no attention to what they told us. Our mess is gradually
settling down. Have picked out our ground, rolled some big logs
together, and are trying to make ourselves comfortable. I am in the
best of spirits, and will live with them for some time to come if
they will only give me one-quarter enough to eat, and they are doing
it now, and am in my glory. Weather cleared up, and very cold nights.
We put on all our clothes nights and take them off day-times. The men
do most of their sleeping through the day, and shiver through the
long nights.

March 17.—Get almost enough to eat, such as it is, but don’t get it
regularly; sometimes in the morning, and sometimes in the afternoon.
Six hundred more prisoners came last night, and from Belle Isle, Va.,
our old home. Andersonville is situated on two hillsides, with a
small stream of swampy water running through the center, and on both
sides of the stream is a piece of swamp with two or three acres in
it. We have plenty of wood now, but it will not last long. They will
undoubtedly furnish us with wood from the outside, when it is burned
up on the inside. A very unhealthy climate. A good many are being
poisoned by poisonous roots, and there is a thick green scum on the
water. All who drink freely are made sick, and their faces swell up
so they cannot see.

March 18.—There are about fifteen acres of ground enclosed in the
stockade and we have the freedom of the whole ground. Plenty of
room, but they are filling it up. Six hundred new men coming each
day from Richmond. Guards are perched upon top of the stockade; are
very strict, and to-day one man was shot for approaching too near
the wall. A little warm to-day. Found W. B. Rowe, from Jackson,
Mich.; he is well and talks encouraging. We have no shelter of
any kind whatever. Eighteen or twenty die per day. Cold and damp
nights. The dews wet things through completely, and by morning all
nearly chilled. Wood getting scarce. On the outside it is a regular
wilderness of pines. Railroad a mile off and can just see the cars as
they go by, which is the only sign of civilization in sight. Rebels
all the while at work making the prison stronger. Very poor meal, and
not so much to-day as formerly. My young friend Billy Havens was
sent to the hospital about the time we left Richmond. Shall be glad
to hear of his recovery. Prevailing conversation is food and exchange.

March 19.—A good deal of fighting going on among us. A large
number of sailors and marines are confined with us, and they are a
quarrelsome set. I have a very sore hand, caused by cutting a hole
through the car trying to get out. I have to write with my left hand.
It is going to be an awful place during the summer months here, and
thousands will die no doubt.

March 21.—Prison gradually filling up with forlorn looking creatures.
Wood is being burned up gradually. Have taken in my old acquaintance
and a member of my own company “A” 9th Mich. Cavalry, Wm. B. Rowe.
Sergt. Rowe is a tall, straight, dark complexioned man, about
thirty-five years old. He was captured while carrying dispatches
from Knoxville to Gen. Burnside. Has been a prisoner two or three
months, and was in Pemerton Building until sent here. He is a tough,
able-bodied man. Every day I find new Michigan men, some of them old
acquaintances.

March 23.—Stockade all up, and we are penned in. Our mess is out of
filthy lucre—otherwise, busted. Sold my overcoat to a guard, and for
luxuries we are eating that up. My blanket keeps us all warm. There
are two more in our mess. Daytimes the large spread is stretched
three or four feet high on four sticks, and keeps off the sun, and at
night taken down for a cover.

March 24.—Digging a tunnel to get out of this place. Prison getting
filthy. Prisoners somewhat to blame for it. Good many dying, and they
are those who take no care of themselves, drink poor water, etc.

March 25.—Lieut. Piersons is no longer in command of the prison,
but instead a Capt. Wirtz. Came inside to-day and looked us over.
Is not a very prepossessing looking chap. Is about thirty-five or
forty years old, rather tall, and a little stoop shouldered; skin
has a pale, white livered look, with thin lips. Has a sneering sort
of cast of countenance. Makes a fellow feel as if he would like
to go up and boot him. Should judge he was a Swede, or some such
countryman. Hendryx thinks he could make it warm for him in short
order if he only had a chance. Wirtz wears considerable jewelry on
his person—long watch chain, something that looks like a diamond
for a pin in his shirt, and wears patent leather boots or shoes. I
asked him if he didn’t think we would be exchanged soon. He said: Oh,
yes, we would be exchanged soon. Somehow or other this assurance
don’t elate us much; perhaps it was his manner when saying it.
Andersonville is getting to be a rather bad place as it grows warmer.
Several sick with fevers and sores.

March 26.—Well, well, my birthday came six days ago, and how old do
you think I am? Let me see. Appearances would seem to indicate that I
am thirty or thereabouts, but as I was born on the 20th day of March,
1843, I must now be just twenty-one years of age, this being the year
1864. Of age and six days over. I thought that when a man became of
age, he generally became free and his own master as well. If this
ain’t a burlesque on that old time-honored custom, then carry me
out—but not feet foremost.

March 27.—We have issued to us once each day about a pint of beans,
or more properly peas, (full of bugs), and three-quarters of a pint
of meal, and nearly every day a piece of bacon the size of your two
fingers, probably about three or four ounces. This is very good
rations taken in comparison to what I have received before. The pine
which we use in cooking is pitch pine, and a black smoke arises from
it; consequently we are black as negroes. Prison gradually filling
from day to day, and situation rather more unhealthy. Occasionally a
squad comes in who have been lately captured, and they tell of our
battles, sometimes victorious and sometimes otherwise. Sometimes we
are hopeful and sometimes the reverse. Take all the exercise we can,
drink no water, and try to get along. It is a sad sight to see the
men die so fast. New prisoners die the quickest and are buried in the
near vicinity, we are told in trenches without coffins. Sometimes we
have visitors of citizens and women who come to look at us. There is
sympathy in some of their faces and in some a lack of it. A dead line
composed of slats of boards runs around on the inside of the wall,
about twelve or fourteen feet from the wall, and we are not allowed
to go near it on pain of being shot by the guard.

March 28.—We are squadded over to-day, and rations about to come in.
It’s a sickly dirty place. Seems as if the sun was not over a mile
high, and has a particular grudge against us. Wirtz comes inside and
has began to be very insolent. Is constantly watching for tunnels.
He is a brute. We call him the “Flying Dutchman.” Came across Sergt.
Bullock, of my regiment, whom I last saw on Belle Isle. From a fat,
chubby young fellow, he is a perfect wreck. Lost his voice and can
hardly speak aloud; nothing but skin and bone, and black and ragged.
Never saw such a change in a human being. Cannot possibly live, I
don’t think; still he is plucky and hates to die. Goes all around
enquiring for news, and the least thing encouraging cheers him up.
Capt. Moseby, of the raiders, is in the same squad with me. He is
quite an intelligent fellow and often talks with us. We lend him our
boiling cup which he returns with thanks. Better to keep on the right
side of him, if we can without countenancing his murderous operations.

March 29.—Raiders getting more bold as the situation grows worse.
Often rob a man now of all he has, in public, making no attempt at
concealment. In sticking up for the weaker party, our mess gets into
trouble nearly every day, and particularly Hendryx, who will fight
any time.

March 30.—The gate opens every little while letting some poor victims
into this terrible place, which is already much worse than Belle
Isle. Seems as if our government is at fault in not providing some
way to get us out of here. The hot weather months must kill us all
outright. Feel myself at times sick and feverish with no strength
seemingly. Dr. Lewis worries, worries, all the day long, and it’s
all we can do to keep him from giving up entirely. Sergt. Rowe takes
things as they come in dogged silence. Looks like a caged lion.
Hendryx sputters around, scolding away, &c.

April 1.—This is an April Fool sure. Saw a fellow to-day from our
regiment, named Casey. Says I was reported dead at the regiment,
which is cheerful. Perhaps it is just as well though, for them to
anticipate the event a few months. It is said that Wirtz shot some
one this morning. Often hear the guards shoot and hear of men being
killed. Am not ambitious to go near them. Have completely lost my
desire to be on the outside working for extra rations. Prefer to
stick it out where I am than to have anything to do with them. They
are an ungodly crew, and should have the warmest corner in that place
we sometimes hear mentioned.

April 2—James Robins, an Indiana soldier, is in our close proximity.
Was wounded and taken prisoner not long since. Wound, which is in the
thigh, is in a terrible condition, and gangrene setting in. Although
he was carried to the gate to-day, was refused admission to the
hospital or medical attendance. Rebels say they have no medicine for
us. Robins has been telling me about himself and family at home, and
his case is only one of a great many good substantial men of families
who must die in Southern prisons, as victims to mismanagement. The
poorer the Confederacy, and the meaner they are, the more need
that our government should get us away from here, and not put
objectionable men at the head of exchange to prevent our being sent
home or back to our commands.

April 3—We have stopped wondering at suffering or being surprised at
anything. Can’t do the subject justice and so don’t try. Walk around
camp every morning looking for acquaintances, the sick, &c. Can see a
dozen most any morning laying around dead. A great many are terribly
afflicted with diarrhea and scurvy begins to take hold of some.
Scurvy is a bad disease, and taken in connection with the former is
sure death. Some have dropsy as well as scurvy, and the swollen limbs
and body are sad to see. To think that these victims have people at
home, mothers, wives and sisters, who are thinking of them and would
do much for them if they had the chance, little dreaming of their
condition.

April 4.—Same old story—coming in and being carried out; all have a
feeling of lassitude which prevents much exertion. Have been digging
in a tunnel for a day or two with a dozen others who are in the
secret. It’s hard work. A number of tunnels have been discovered. The
water now is very warm and sickening.

April 5.—Dr. Lewis talks about nothing except his family. Is the
bluest mortal here, and worries himself sick, let alone causes
sufficient for that purpose. Is poorly adapted for hardships. For
reading we have the “Pilgrim’s Progress,” donated to me by some one
when on Belle Isle. Guess I can repeat nearly all the book by heart.
Make new acquaintances every day. “Scotty,” a marine, just now is
edifying our mess with his salt water yarns, and they are tough ones.
I tell him he may die here; still he declares they are true.

April 6—John Smith is here and numerous of his family. So many
go by nick-names, that seldom any go by their real names. Its
“Minnesota,” “Big Charlie,” “Little Jim,” “Marine Jack,” “Indiana
Feller,” “Mopey,” “Skinny,” “Smarty,” &c. Hendryx is known by the
latter name, Sanders is called “Dad,” Rowe is called the “Michigan
Sergeant,” Lewis is called plain “Doc.” while I am called, for some
unknown reason, “Bugler.” I have heard it said that I looked just
like a Dutch bugler, and perhaps that is the reason of my cognomen.
Probably thirty die per day. The slightest news about exchange is
told from one to the other, and gains every time repeated, until
finally its grand good news and sure exchange immediately. The weak
ones feed upon these reports and struggle along from day to day. One
hour they are all hope and expectation and the next hour as bad the
other way. The worst looking scallawags perched upon the stockade as
guards, from boys just large enough to handle a gun, to old men who
ought to have been dead years ago for the good of their country. Some
prisoners nearly naked, the majority in rags and daily becoming more
destitute. My clothes are good and kept clean, health fair although
very poor in flesh. Man killed at the dead line.

April 7.—Capt. Wirtz prowls around the stockade with a rebel escort
of guards, looking for tunnels. Is very suspicious of amateur wells
which some have dug for water. It is useless to speak to him about
our condition, as he will give us no satisfaction whatever. Says it
is good enough for us —— yankees. I am deputized by half a dozen or
so to speak to him as to the probabilities of a change, and whether
we may not reasonably expect to be exchanged without passing the
summer here. In his position he must know something in relation
to our future. At the first favorable moment shall approach his
highness. Prison is all the time being made stronger, more guards
coming and artillery looking at us rather unpleasantly from many
directions. Think it impossible for any to get away here, so far
from our lines. The men too are not able to withstand the hardships
attendant upon an escape, still fully one-half of all here are
constantly on the alert for chances to get away. Foremost in all
schemes for freedom is Hendryx, and we are engaging in a new tunnel
enterprise. The yankee is a curious animal, never quiet until dead.
There are some here who pray and try to preach. Very many too who
have heretofore been religiously inclined, throw off all restraint
and are about the worst. Tried and found wanting it seems to me.
Those who find the least fault, make the best of things as they come
and grin and bear it, get along the best. Weather getting warmer,
water warmer and nastier, food worse and less in quantities, and more
prisoners coming nearly every day.

April 8.—We are digging with an old fire shovel at our tunnel. The
shovel is a prize; we also use half of canteens, pieces of boards,
&c. Its laborious work. A dozen are engaged in it. Like going into
a grave to go into a tunnel. Soil light and liable to cave in.
Take turns in digging. Waste dirt carried to the stream in small
quantities and thrown in. Not much faith in the enterprise, but
work with the rest as a sort of duty. Raiders acting fearful. Was
boiling my cup of meal to-day and one of the raiders ran against it
and over it went. Give him a whack side of the head that made him
see stars I should judge, and in return he made me see the whole
heavens. Battese, a big Indian, rather helped me out of the scrape.
All of our mess came to my rescue. Came near being a big fight with
dozens engaged. Battese is a large full blooded six foot Minnesota
Indian, has quarters near us, and is a noble fellow. He and other
Indians have been in our hundred for some weeks. They are quiet,
attend to their own business, and won’t stand much nonsense. Great
deal of fighting. One Duffy, a New York rough, claims the light
weight championship of Andersonville. Regular battles quite often.
Remarkable how men will stand up and be pummeled. Dr. Lewis daily
getting worse off. Is troubled with scurvy and dropsy. If he was at
home would be considered dangerously ill and in bed, but he walks
around slowly inquiring for news in a pitiful way. I have probably
fifty acquaintances here that visit us each day to talk the situation
over. Jimmy Devers, my Michigan friend whom I found on Belle Isle,
Sergt. Bullock, of my regiment; Tom McGill, also of Michigan;
Michael Hoare, a schoolmate of mine from earliest recollection, Dorr
Blakeman, also a resident of Jackson, Michigan, a little fellow
named Swan, who lived in Ypsylanti, Mich.; Burckhardt from near
Lansing; Hub Dakin, from Dansville, Mich., and many others, meet
often to compare notes, and we have many a hearty laugh in the midst
of misery. I dicker and trade and often make an extra ration. We
sometimes draw small cow peas for rations, and being a printer by
trade, I spread the peas out on a blanket and quickly pick them up
one at a time, after the manner of picking up type. One drawback is
the practice of unconsciously putting the beans into my mouth. In
this way I often eat up the whole printing office. I have trials of
skill with a fellow named Land, who is also a printer. There are no
other typos here that I know of.

April 9.—See here Mr. Confederacy, this is going a little too far.
You have no business to kill us off at this rate. About thirty or
forty die daily. They have rigged up an excuse for a hospital on the
outside, where the sick are taken. Admit none though who can walk
or help themselves in any way. Some of our men are detailed to help
as nurses, but in a majority of cases those who go out on parole of
honor are cut-throats and robbers, who abuse a sick prisoner. Still,
there are exceptions to this rule. We hear stories of Capt. Wirtz’s
cruelty in punishing the men, but I hardly credit all the stories.
More prisoners to-day. Some captured near Petersburg. Don’t know
anything about exchange. Scurvy and dropsy taking hold of the men.
Many are blind as soon as it becomes night, and it is called moon
blind. Caused, I suppose, by sleeping with the moon shining in the
face. Talked with Michael Hoare, an old school fellow of mine. Mike
was captured while we were in Pemerton Building, and was one of
Dahlgreen’s men. Was taken right in the suburbs of Richmond. Has told
me all the news of their failure on account of Kilpatrick failing to
make a junction at some point. Mike is a great tall, slim fellow, and
a good one. Said he heard my name called out in Richmond as having a
box of eatables from the North. He also saw a man named Shaw claim
the box with a written order from me, Shaw was one of our mess on
Belle Isle. He was sent to Richmond while sick, from the island, knew
of my expecting the box, and forged an order to get it. Well, that
was rough, still I probably wouldn’t have got it any way. Better him
than some rebel. Mike gave me a lot of black pepper which we put into
our soup, which is a luxury. He has no end of talk at his tongue’s
end, and it is good to hear. Recounts how once when I was about eight
or ten years old and he some older, I threw a base ball club and hit
him on the shins. Then ran and he couldn’t catch me. It was when we
were both going to school to A. A. Henderson, in Jackson, Mich. Think
I remember the incident, and am strongly under the impression that he
caught me. It is thus that old friends meet after many years. John
McGuire is also here, another Jackson man. He has a family at home
and is worried. Says he used to frequently see my brother George at
Hilton Head, before being captured.

April 10.—Getting warmer and warmer. Can see the trees swaying back
and forth on the outside, but inside not a breath of fresh air. Our
wood is all gone, and we are now digging up stumps and roots for
fuel to cook with. Some of the first prisoners here have passable
huts made of logs, sticks, pieces of blankets, &c. Room about all
taken up in here now. Rations not so large. Talk that they intend to
make the meal into bread before sending it inside, which will be an
improvement. Rations have settled down to less than a pint of meal
per day, with occasionally a few peas, or an apology for a piece
of bacon, for each man. Should judge that they have hounds on the
outside to catch runaways, from the noise. Wirtz don’t come in as
much as formerly. The men make it uncomfortable for him. As Jimmy
Devers says, “He is a terror.” I have omitted to mention Jimmy’s name
of late, although he is with us all the time—not in our mess, but
close by. He has an old pack of cards with which we play to pass away
the time. Many of the men have testaments, and “house-wives” which
they have brought with them from home, and it is pitiful to see them
look at these things while thinking of their loved ones at home.

April 11.—Dr. Lewis is very bad off with the scurvy and diarrhea. We
don’t think he can stand it much longer, but make out to him that he
will stick it through. Our government must hear of our condition here
and get us away before long. If they don’t, its a poor government
to tie to. Hendryx and myself are poor, as also are all the mess.
Still in good health compared with the generality of the prisoners.
Jimmy Devers has evidently sort of dried up, and it don’t seem to
make any difference whether he gets anything to eat or not. He has
now been a prisoner of war nearly a year, and is in good health and
very hopeful of getting away in time. Sticks up for our government
and says there is some good reason for our continued imprisonment. I
can see none. As many as 12,000 men here now, and crowded for room.
Death rate is in the neighborhood of eighty per day. Hendryx prowls
around all over the prison, bringing us what good news he can, which
is not much. A very heavy dew nights, which is almost a rain. Rebels
very domineering. Many are tunneling to get out. Our tunnel has been
abandoned, as the location was not practicable. Yank shot to-day near
our quarters. Approached too near the dead line. Many of the men
have dug down through the sand and reached water, but it is poor; no
better than out of the creek.

April 12.—Another beautiful but warm day with no news. Insects of all
descriptions making their appearance, such as lizards, a worm four or
five inches long, fleas, maggots &c. There is so much filth about the
camp that it is terrible trying to live here. New prisoners are made
sick the first hours of their arrival by the stench which pervades
the prison. Old prisoners do not mind it so much, having become used
to it. No visitors come near us any more. Everybody sick, almost,
with scurvy—an awful disease. New cases every day. I am afraid some
contagious disease will get among us, and if so every man will die.
My blanket a perfect God-send. Is large and furnishes shelter from
the burning sun. Hendryx has a very sore arm which troubles him much.
Even he begins to look and feel bad. James Gordan, or Gordenian, (I
don’t know which) was killed to-day by the guard. In crossing the
creek on a small board crossway men are often shot. It runs very
near the dead line, and guards take the occasion to shoot parties
who put their hands on the dead line in going across. Some also
reach up under the dead line to get purer water, and are shot. Men
seemingly reckless of their lives. New prisoners coming in and are
shocked at the sights.

April 13.—Jack Shannon, from Ann Arbor, died this morning. The
raiders are the stronger party now, and do as they please; and we are
in nearly as much danger now from our own men as from the rebels.
Capt. Moseby, of my own hundred, figures conspicuously among the
robberies, and is a terrible villain. During the night some one stole
my jacket. Have traded off all superfluous clothes, and with the loss
of jacket have only pants, shirt, shoes, (no stockings,) and hat; yet
I am well dressed in comparison with some others. Many have nothing
but an old pair of pants which reach, perhaps, to the knees, and
perhaps not. Hendryx has two shirts, and should be mobbed. I do quite
a business trading rations, making soup for the sick ones, taking in
payment their raw food which they cannot eat. Get many a little snack
by so doing.

April 14.—At least twenty fights among our own men this forenoon. It
beats all what a snarling crowd we are getting to be. The men are
perfectly reckless, and had just as soon have their necks broken by
fighting as anything else. New onions in camp. Very small, and sell
for $2 a bunch of four or five. Van Tassel, a Pennsylvanian, is about
to die. Many give me parting injunctions relative to their families,
in case I should live through. Have half a dozen photographs of dead
men’s wives, with addresses on the back of them. Seems to be pretty
generally conceded that if any get through, I will. Not a man here
now is in good health. An utter impossibility to remain well. Signs
of scurvy about my person. Still adhere to our sanitary rules. Lewis
anxious to get to the hospital. Will die any way shortly, whether
there or here. Jimmy Devers, the old prisoner, coming down. Those who
have stood it bravely begin to weaken.

April 15.—The hospital is a tough place to be in, from all accounts.
The detailed Yankees as soon as they get a little authority are
certain to use it for all it is worth. In some cases before a man is
fairly dead, he is stripped of everything, coat, pants, shirt, finger
rings (if he has any), and everything of value taken away. These
the nurses trade to the guards. Does not seem possible but such is
the case, sad to relate. Not very pleasant for a man just breathing
his last, and perhaps thinking of loved ones at home who are all
so unconscious of the condition of their soldier father or brother,
to be suddenly jerked about and fought over, with the cursing and
blaspheming he is apt to hear. The sick now, or a portion of them,
are huddled up in one corner of the prison, to get as bad as they can
before being admitted to the outside hospital. Every day I visit it,
and come away sick at heart that human beings should be thus treated.

April 26.—Ten days since I wrote in my diary, and in those ten days
was too much occupied in trying to dig a tunnel to escape out of,
to write any. On the 21st the tunnel was opened and two fellows
belonging to a Massachusetts regiment escaped to the outside. Hendryx
and myself next went out. The night was very dark. Came up out of
the ground away on the outside of the guard. We crawled along to
gain the woods, and get by some pickets, and when forty or fifty
rods from the stockade, a shot was fired at some one coming out of
the hole. We immediately jumped up and ran for dear life, seemingly
making more noise than a troop of cavalry. It was almost daylight and
away we went. Found I could not run far and we slowed up, knowing we
would be caught, but hoping to get to some house and get something
to eat first. Found I was all broke up for any exertion. In an hour
we had traveled perhaps three miles, were all covered with mud, and
scratched up. I had fell, too, in getting over some logs, and it
seemed to me broken all the ribs in my body. Just as it was coming
light in the east we heard dogs after us. We expected it, and so
armed ourselves with clubs and sat down on a log. In a few moments
the hounds came up with us and began smelling of us. Pretty soon
five mounted rebels arrived on the scene of action. They laughed to
think we expected to get away. Started us back towards our charnel
pen. Dogs did not offer to bite us, but guards told us that if we had
offered resistance or started to run they would have torn us. Arrived
at the prison and after waiting an hour Capt. Wirtz interviewed
us. After cussing us a few minutes we were put in the chain gang,
where we remained two days. This was not very fine, but contrary
to expectation not so bad after all. We had more to eat than when
inside, and we had shade to lay in, and although my ancles were made
very sore, do not regret my escapade. Am not permanently hurt any. We
had quite an allowance of bacon while out, and some spring water to
drink. Also from the surgeon I got some elder berries to steep into a
tea to drink for scurvy, which is beginning to take hold of me. Lewis
is sick and can hardly walk around. His days are few. Have taken
another into our mess, named Swan, from Ypsilanti, Michigan. Is a
fresh looking boy for this place and looks like a girl.

April 27.—Well, I was out from under rebel guard for an hour or so
any way. Hurt my side though, and caught a little cold. Am sore
somewhat. Have given up the idea of escaping. Think if Hendryx had
been alone he would have gotten away. Is tougher than I am. A man
caught stealing from one of his comrades and stabbed with a knife
and killed. To show how little such things are noticed here I will
give the particulars as near as I could get them. There were five
or six men stopping together in a sort of shanty. Two of them were
speculators, and had some money, corn bread, &c., and would not
divide with their comrades, who belonged to their own company and
regiment. Some time in the night one of them got up and was stealing
bread from a haversack belonging to his more prosperous neighbor,
and during the operation woke up the owner, who seized a knife and
stabbed the poor fellow dead. The one who did the murder spoke out
and said: “Harry, I believe Bill is dead; he was just stealing from
me and I run my knife into him.” “Good enough for him,” says Harry.
The two men then got up and straightened out “Bill,” and then both
lay down and went to sleep. An occupant of the hut told me these
particulars and they are true. This morning poor Bill lay in the
hut until eight or nine o’clock, and was then carried outside. The
man who did the killing made no secret of it, but told it to all
who wanted to know the particulars, who were only a few, as the
occurrence was not an unusual one.

April 28.—Dr. Lewis is still getting worse with scurvy and dropsy
combined. Limbs swollen to double their usual size—just like
puff-balls. Raiders do about as they please, and their crimes would
fill more paper than I have at my disposal.

April 30.—Very small rations given to us now. Not more than
one-quarter what we want to eat and that of the poorest quality.
Splendid weather, but too warm; occasional rains. The Flying Dutchman
(Wirtz) offers to give any two at a time twelve hours the start, and
if caught to take the punishment he has for runaways. The offer is
made to intimidate those thinking to escape. Half the men would take
the consequences with two hours start.

May 1.—Warm. Samuel Hutton, of the 9th Mich. Cavalry, died last
night; also Peter Christiancy and Joseph Sargent, of Co. D, 9th
Mich., have died within a few weeks. Last evening 700 of the 85th
New York arrived here. They were taken at Plymouth, N.C., with 1,400
others, making 2,100 in all. The balance are on the road to this
place. Wrote a letter home to-day. Have not heard from the North for
over six months. Dying off very fast.

May 2.—A crazy man was shot dead by the guard an hour ago. The guard
dropped a piece of bread on the inside of the stockade, and the
fellow went inside the dead line to get it and was killed. The bread
wagon was raided upon as soon as it drove inside to-day and all the
bread stolen, for which offense no more will be issued to-day. As I
write Wirtz is walking about the prison revolver in hand, cursing and
swearing. The men yell out “Hang him up!” “Kill the Dutch louse!”
“Buck and gag him!” “Stone him to death!” &c., and he all the time
trying to find out who it is insulting him so. “I vish I find out who
calls me such insulting vords, I kill the dam Yankee as soon I eat my
supper!” And every few minutes a handful of dirt is thrown by some
one. Wreaks his vengeance by keeping back rations from the whole camp.

May 3.—A rebel battery came to-day on the cars, and is being posted
around the stockade. Ever since my introduction to Andersonville they
have been constantly at work making their prison stronger, until now
I believe it is impossible for a person to get away. Notwithstanding,
there are men all the time at work in divers ways. Rebel officers now
say that we are not going to be exchanged during the war, and as they
can hold us now and no fear of escape, they had just as soon tell us
the truth as not, and we must take things just as they see fit to
give them to us. Tom McGill is well and hearty, and as black as any
negro. Over 19,000 confined here now, and the death rate ninety or
one hundred.

May 4.—Good weather. Gen. Howell Cobb and staff came among us to-day,
and inspected the prison. Wirtz accompanied them pointing out and
explaining matters. Gen. Winder, who has charge of all the prisoners
of war in the South, is here, but has not been inside. Gen. Cobb is a
very large and pompous looking man. None of the men dare address his
highness. Three men out of every hundred allowed to go out after wood
under a strong guard.

May 5.—Cold nights and warm days. Very unhealthy, such extremes.
Small-pox cases carried out, and much alarm felt lest it should
spread.

May 6.—Six months a prisoner to-day. Longer than any six years of
my previous life. It is wonderful how well I stand the hardships
here. At home I was not very robust, in fact had a tendency to poor
health; but there are not many in prison that stand it as well as I
do. There are about eighty-five or ninety dying now per day, as near
as I can find out. Of course there are stories to the effect that a
hundred and fifty and two hundred die each day, but such is not the
case. Have a code of reasoning that is pretty correct. Often wonder
if I shall get home again, and come to the conclusion that I shall.
My hopeful disposition does more for me than anything else. Sanders
trades and dickers around and makes extra eatables for our mess.
There is not a hog in the mess. Nearly every day some one is killed
for some trifling offense, by the guards. Rather better food to-day
than usual.

May 7.—A squad of Yankees taken outside to-day on parole of honor,
for the purpose of baking meal into bread. George Hendryx is one of
the number, and he will have enough to eat after this, which I am
glad of. I could have gotten outside if I so chose, but curious to
write down I don’t want to go. George says he will try and send in
something for us to eat, and I know he will, for a truer hearted
fellow never lived.

May 8.—Awful warm and more sickly. About 3,500 have died since I came
here, which is a good many, come to think of it—cooked rations of
bread to-day. We get a quarter of a loaf of bread, weighing about six
ounces, and four or five ounces of pork. These are small allowances,
but being cooked it is better for us. Rebels are making promises of
feeding us better, which we hope they will keep. There is nothing
the matter with me now but lack of food. The scurvy symptoms which
appeared a few weeks ago have all gone.

May 9.—Many rebels riding about camp on horseback. I listened to an
animated conversation between an officer and two of our men. Mr.
Rebel got talked all to pieces and hushed up entirely. He took it
good naturedly, however, and for a wonder did not swear and curse
us. It is a great treat to see a decent rebel. Am lonesome since
Hendryx went outside. Men are continually going up to the dead line
and getting shot. They do not get much sympathy, as they should know
better.

May 10.—Capt. Wirtz very domineering and abusive. Is afraid to come
into camp any more. There are a thousand men in here who would
willingly die if they could kill him first. Certainly the worst man
I ever saw. New prisoners coming in every day with good clothes,
blankets, &c., and occasionally with considerable money. These are
victims for the raiders who pitch into them for plunder. Very
serious fights occur. Occasionally a party of new comers stick
together and whip the raiders, who afterward rally their forces and
the affair ends with the robbers victorious. Stones, clubs, knives,
sling shots, &c., are used on these occasions, and sometimes the camp
gets so stirred up that the rebels, thinking a break is intended,
fire into the crowds gathered, and many are killed before quiet is
again restored. Then Wirtz writes out an order and sends inside,
telling he is prepared for any break, etc., etc. No less than five
have died within a radius of thirty feet in the last twenty-four
hours. Hendryx has a sore arm and in turning over last night I hurt
it. He pitched in to me while I was in a sound sleep to pay me for
it. Woke up in short order and we had it, rough and tumble. Tore
down the tent poles—rolled around—scaring Lewis and all the rest. I
am the stoutest, and soon get on top and hold him down, and keep him
there until he quiets down, which is always in about five minutes.
We have squabbles of this sort often, which don’t do any particular
harm. Always laugh, shake and make up afterwards. The “Astor House
Mess,” or the heads rather, have gently requested that we do our
fighting by daylight, and Sanders very forcibly remarked that should
another scene occur as happened last night, he will take a hand in
the business and lick us both. Battese laughed, for about the first
time this summer. He has taken quite a shine to both Hendryx and
myself. In the fore part of to-day’s entry I should have stated that
Hendryx has been sent inside, they not being quite ready for him at
the cook-house. He is a baker by trade.

May 11.—Rainy weather and cold nights. Men shiver and cry all
night—groan and “holler.” I lay awake sometimes for hours, listening
to the guards yell out “Post number one; ten o’clock and all’s well!”
And then Post No. 2 takes up the refrain, and it goes all around the
camp, every one with a different sounding voice, squeaky, coarse, and
all sorts. Some of them drawl out “H-e-r-e-’s y-e-r m-u-l-e!” and
such like changes, instead of “All’s well.” Rumors of hard fighting
about Richmond, and the rebels getting whipped, which of course they
deny.

May 12.—Received a few lines from George Hendryx, who again went
out to work on the outside last night. Wirtz with a squad of guards
is about the camp looking for tunnels. Patrols also looking among
the prisoners for deserters. A lame man, for telling of a tunnel,
was pounded almost to death last night, and this morning they were
chasing him to administer more punishment, when he ran inside the
dead line claiming protection of the guard. The guard didn’t protect
worth a cent, but shot him through the head. A general hurrahing took
place, as the rebel had only saved our men the trouble of killing
him. More rumors of hard fighting about Richmond. Grant getting the
best of it I reckon. Richmond surrounded and rebels evacuating the
place. These are the rumors. Guards deny it.

May 13.—Rainy morning. We are guarded by an Alabama regiment, who
are about to leave for the front. Georgia militia to take their
places. Making preparations for a grand pic-nic outside, given by the
citizens of the vicinity to the troops about to leave. I must here
tell a funny affair that has happened to me, which, although funny
is very annoying. Two or three days before I was captured I bought a
pair of cavalry boots of a teamster named Carpenter. The boots were
too small for him and just fitted me. Promised to pay him on “pay
day,” we not having been paid off in some time. We were both taken
prisoners and have been in the same hundred ever since. Has dunned
me now about 1,850 times, and has always been mad at not getting his
pay. Sold the boots shortly after being captured and gave him half
the receipts, and since that have paid him in rations and money as
I could get it, until about sixty cents remain unpaid, and that sum
is a sticker. He is my evil genius, and fairly haunts the life out
of me. Whatever I may get trusted for in after life, it shall never
be for a pair of boots. Carpenter is now sick with scurvy, and I am
beginning to get the same disease hold of me again. Battese cut my
hair which was about a foot long. Gay old cut. Many have long hair,
which, being never combed, is matted together and full of vermin.
With sunken eyes, blackened countenances from pitch pine smoke, rags
and disease, the men look sickening. The air reeks with nastiness,
and it is wonder that we live at all. When will relief come to us?

May 14.—A band of music came from Macon yesterday to attend the
pic-nic. A large crowd of women were present to grace the occasion.
The grounds on which the festivities were held lay a mile off and in
sight of all. In the evening a Bowery dance was one of the pleasures
enjoyed. “The Girl I Left Behind Me,” was about all they could play,
and that very poorly.

May 15.—Sabbath day and hot. Would give anything for some shade
to lay in. Even this luxury is denied us, and we are obliged to
crawl around more dead than alive. Rumors that Sherman is marching
towards Atlanta, and that place threatened. Kilpatrick said to be
moving toward us for the purpose of effecting our release. Hope he
will be more successful than in his attack on Richmond. Rebels have
dug a deep ditch all around on the outside of the wall to prevent
tunneling, and a guard walks in the bottom of the ditch. Banghart, of
my Regiment, died to-day.

May 16.—Two men got away during the night and were brought back
before noon. (Was going to say before dinner.) The men are torn by
the dogs, and one of them full of buck shot. A funny way of escape
has just been discovered by Wirtz. A man pretends to be dead and is
carried out on a stretcher and left with the row of dead. As soon as
it gets dark, Mr. Dead-man jumps up and runs. Wirtz suspecting the
trick took to watching, and discovered a “dead man” running away. An
examination now takes place by the surgeon before being permitted out
from under guard. I hear a number of men have gotten away by this
method, and it seems very probable, as dead men are so plenty that
not much attention is paid to them.

May 17.—Had a funny dream last night. Thought the rebels were so
hard up for mules that they hitched up a couple of grayback lice to
draw in the bread. Wirtz is watching out for Yankee tricks. Some one
told him the other day that the Yankees were making a large balloon
inside and some day would all rise up in the air and escape. He flew
around as if mad, but could find no signs of a balloon. Says there is
no telling what “te tam Yankee will do.” Some prisoners came to-day
who were captured at Dalton, and report the place in our possession,
and the rebels driven six miles this side. Kilpatrick and Stoneman
are both with Sherman and there are expectations of starting out on
some mission soon, supposed to be for this place. Nineteen thousand
confined here now and dying at the rate of ninety per day. Philo
Lewis, of the 5th Michigan Cav., can live but a day or two. Talks
continually of his wife and family in Ypsilanti, Mich. Has pictures
of the whole family, which he has given me to take home to them,
also a long letter addressed to his wife and children. Mr. Lewis
used to be a teacher of singing in Ypsilanti. He is a fine looking
man naturally, and a smart man, but he must go the way of thousands
of others, and perhaps myself. One of his pupils is here confined.
Philo Lewis must not be confounded with F. L. Lewis, the member of
our mess. The latter, however, cannot live but a short time unless
relief comes. Fine weather but very warm. The sandy soil fairly alive
with vermin. If this place is so bad at this time of the year, what
must it be in July, August and September? Every man will die, in my
estimation, but perhaps we may be relieved before then. We’ll try and
think so anyway. New prisoners die off the fastest.

May 18.—We have some good singers in camp, and strange as it may
seem, a good deal of singing is indulged in. There are some men that
are happy as long as they can breathe, and such men smoothe over many
rough places here. God bless a man who can sing in this place. A
priest comes inside praying and chanting. A good man to come to such
a place. Performs his duty the same to small-pox patients as to any
other. Shall try and find out his name. Some of the wells dug by the
Yanks furnish passable water, an improvement anyway on swamp water.
Well water in great demand and sells readily for such trinkets as the
men have to dispose of. Rebels building forts on the outside. Rebel
officers inside trying to induce shoemakers, foundrymen, carpenters
and wood choppers, to go out and work for the Confederacy. A very
few accepted the offer. Well, life is sweet, and can hardly blame
men for accepting the offer; still, I don’t want to go, neither do
ninety-nine out of every hundred. The soldiers here are loyal to the
cause.

May 19.—Nearly twenty thousand men confined here now. New ones
coming every day. Rations _very_ small and _very_ poor. The meal
that the bread is made out of is ground, seemingly, cob and all, and
it scourges the men fearfully. Things getting continually worse.
Hundreds of cases of dropsy. Men puff out of human shape and are
perfectly horrible to look at. Philo Lewis died to-day. Could not
have weighed at the time of his death more than ninety pounds, and
was originally a large man, weighing not less than one hundred and
seventy. Jack Walker, of the 9th Mich. Cavalry, has received the
appointment to assist in carrying out the dead, for which service he
receives an extra ration of corn bread.

May 20.—Hendryx sent me in to-day from the outside a dozen small
onions and some green tea. No person, on suddenly being lifted from
the lowest depths of misery to peace and plenty, and all that money
could buy, could feel more joyous or grateful than myself for those
things. As the articles were handed in through the gate a crowd saw
the transaction, and it was soon known that I had a friend on the
outside who sent me in extras. I learn that a conspiracy is being
gotten up on the outside, in which Hendryx is at the head, and they
will try and overpower the guard and release the prisoners. If Capt.
Wirtz only knew it, he has a very dangerous man in George Hendryx.
Cram full of adventure, he will be heard from wherever he is.

May 21.—Still good weather and hot, with damp nights. Dr. Lewis
lingers along in a miserable state of existence, and scurvy
and dropsy doing their worst. His old mess-mates at the 9th
Michigan regimental head-quarters little think of their favorite,
story-telling, good fellows’ condition now. We take as good care of
him as possible under the circumstances. Two men shot to-day by the
barbarians, and one of them has lain all the afternoon where he fell.

May 22.—No news of importance. Same old story. Am now a gallant
washer-man. Battese, the Minnesota Indian, learn’t me in the way of
his occupation, made me a wash board by cutting creases in a piece of
board, and I am fully installed. We have a sign out, made by myself
on a piece of shingle: “WASHING.” We get small pieces of bread for
our labors. Some of the sick cannot eat their bread, and not being
able to keep clean, give us a job. Make probably a pound of bread two
or three days in the week. Battese says: “I work, do me good; you
do same.” Have many applications for admission to the firm, and may
enlarge the business.

May 23.—Rains very hard. Seems as if the windows of Heaven had opened
up, in fact the windows out all together. It’s a grand good thing for
the camp, as it washes away the filth and purifies the air.

May 24.—Sherman coming this way, so said, towards Atlanta. It is
thought the cavalry will make a break for us, but even if they do
they cannot get us north. We are equal to no exertion. Men busy
to-day killing swallows that fly low; partly for amusement, but more
particularly for food they furnish. Are eaten raw before hardly dead.
No, thank you, I will take no swallow.

May 25.—One thousand new prisoners came to-day from near Petersburg,
Va. They give us encouraging news as to the termination of the
spring campaign. Gen. Burnside said in a speech to his men that
Petersburg would be taken in less than a month or Mrs. Burnside
would be a widow. Every one hopeful. Getting warmer after the rain.
Our squad has a very good well, and about one-quarter water enough,
of something a trifle better than swamp water. Man killed by the
raiders near where we slept. Head all pounded to pieces with a club.
Murders an every day occurrence.

May 26.—For the last three days I have had nearly enough to eat
such as it is. My washing business gives me extra food. Have taken
in a partner, and the firm now is Battese, Ransom & Co. Think of
taking in more partners, making Battese president, appointing
vice presidents, secretaries, &c. We charge a ration of bread for
admittance. Sand makes a very good soap. If we could get hold of a
razor and open a barber shop in connection, our fortunes would be
made. We are prolonging Lewis’ life by trading for luxuries to give
him. Occasionally a little real meat soup, with a piece of onion in
it, etc. Am saving up capital to buy a pair of shears I know of.
Molasses given us to-day, from two to four spoonfuls apiece, which is
indeed a treat. Anything sweet or sour, or in the vegetable line, is
the making of us. We have taken to mixing a little meal with water,
putting in a little molasses and setting it in the sun to sour. Great
trouble in the lack of vessels in which to keep it, and then too,
after getting a dish partly well soured, some poor prisoner will
deliberately walk up and before we can see him drink it all up. Men
are fairly crazy for such things.

May 27.—We twist up pieces of tin, stovepipe, &c., for dishes. A
favorite and common dish is half of a canteen. Our spoons are made
of wood. Hardly one man in ten has a dish of any kind to put his
rations of soup or molasses in, and often old shoes, dirty caps and
the like are brought into requisition. Notwithstanding my prosperity
in business the scurvy is taking right hold of me. All my old
acquaintances visit us daily and we condole with one another. Fresh
beef given us to-day, but in very small quantities with no wood or
salt to put it into proper shape. No one can very well object to raw
beef, however. Great trouble is in getting it to us before being
tainted, I persistently let alone meat with even a suspicion of
rottenness; makes no difference with nearly all here. We occasionally
hear of the conspiracy of outside paroled Yankees. Time will tell if
it amounts to anything.

May 28.—No more news. It really seems as if we’re all to die here. My
mouth getting sore from scurvy and teeth loose. New prisoners coming
in every day and death rate increasing. I don’t seem to get hardened
to the situation and am shuddering all the time at the sights. Rainy
weather.

May 29.—Sabbath day but not a pleasant one. Nearly a thousand just
came in. Would seem to me that the rebels are victorious in their
battles. New men are perfectly thunderstruck at the hole they have
got into. A great many give right up and die in a few weeks, and
some in a week. My limbs are badly swollen with scurvy and dropsy
combined. Mouth also very sore. Battese digs for roots which he
steeps up and I drink. Could give up and die in a short time but
won’t. Have got living reduced to a science.

May 30.—Another thousand came to-day and from the eastern army.
Prison crowded. Men who came are from Siegel’s corps in the
Shenandoah Valley. The poor deluded mortals never heard of
Andersonville before. Well, they hear of it now. Charlie Hudson, from
some part of Ohio, took his canteen an hour ago and went to the swamp
for water. He has not returned for the very good reason that he was
shot while reaching up under the dead line to get the freshest water.
Some one has pulled the body out of the water on to dry land where it
will stay until to-morrow, when it will be piled with perhaps forty
others on the dead wagon, carted off and buried like a dog. And this
is the last of poor Charlie, who has enlivened us many an evening
with his songs and stories. The Astor House Mess is very sad to-night.

May 31.—A rebel came inside to-day and enquired for me, in the tenth
squad, first mess. I responded, wondering and fearful as to what they
should want with me. Was happily surprised on going to the gate to
see Hendryx with something in his hand for me. Seemed thunderstruck
at my appearance and said I was looking bad. He was looking better
than when he went out. Had brought me luxuries in the shape of ginger
bread, onions and tea, and am happy. Geo. is a brick. Says it is
against orders to send anything inside but he talked them over. Was
afraid the raiders would waylay me before reaching the mess but they
did not.

June 1.—Reported that the 51st Virginia Regt. is here for the purpose
of conducting us north for exchange. Believe nothing of the kind.
Prisoners come daily. E. P. Sanders, Rowe and myself carried our old
friend Dr. Lewis to the hospital. He was immediately admitted and we
came away feeling very sad, knowing he would live but a short time.
The sick are not admitted until they are near death, and then there
is no hope for them. Rainy day.

June 2.—Another dark, stormy day. Raiders playing the very devil.
Muddy and sticky.

[Illustration: Battese, the Minnesota Indian.]

June 3.—New prisoners say that an armistice has been agreed upon for
the purpose of effecting an exchange, and negotiating for peace.
It may be so, and the authorities had good reasons for allowing
us to stay here, but how can they pay for all the suffering? And
now some negro prisoners brought inside. They belong to the 54th
Massachusetts. Came with white prisoners. Many of the negroes
wounded, as, indeed, there are wounded among all who come here now.
No news from Hendryx or Lewis. Quite a number going out after wood to
cook with. Hot and wet.

June 4.—Have not been dry for many days. Raining continually. Some
men took occasion while out after wood, to overpower the guard and
take to the pines. Not yet been brought back. _Very_ small rations of
poor molasses, corn bread and bug soup.

June 5.—Exchange rumors to the effect that transports are en-route
for Savannah for the purpose of taking us home. Stick right to my
washing however. A number of men taken out to be kept as hostages—so
said. Raiders rule the prison. Am myself cross and feel like licking
somebody, but Hendryx is gone and don’t want to try to lick anybody
else, fearing I might get licked myself. Some fun fighting him as it
didn’t make any difference which licked.

June 6.—Eight months a prisoner to-day. A lifetime has been crowded
into these eight months. No rations at all. Am now a hair cutter.
Have _hired_ the shears. Enough to eat but not the right kind. Scurvy
putting in its work, and symptoms of dropsy. Saw Hendryx at the bake
house up stairs window, looking over the camp. Probably looking to
see if he can locate his old comrades among the sea of human beings.
Wirtz comes inside no more, in fact, does very few rebels. The place
is too bad for them.

June 7.—Heard to-day that Hendryx had been arrested and in irons for
inciting a conspiracy. Not much alarmed for him. He will come out all
right. Still rainy. Have hard work keeping my diary dry. Nearly all
the old prisoners who were captured with me are dead. Don’t know of
over 50 or 60 alive out of 800.




FROM BAD TO WORSE.

  THE ASTOR HOUSE MESS STILL HOLDS TOGETHER, ALTHOUGH DEPLETED—ALL
  MORE OR LESS DISEASED—AS THE WEATHER GETS WARMER THE DEATH RATE
  INCREASES—DYING OFF LIKE SHEEP—THE END IS NOT YET.


June 8.—More new prisoners. There are now over 23,000 confined here,
and the death rate 100 to 130 per day, and I believe more than that.
Rations worse.

June 9.—It is said that a grand break will occur soon, and nearly
the whole prison engaged in the plot. Spies inform the rebels of our
intentions. Rains yet.

June 10.—The whole camp in a blaze of excitement. Plans for the
outbreak known to Capt. Wirtz. Some traitor unfolded the plans to
him. Thirty or forty pieces of artillery pointed at us from the
outside, and stockade covered with guards who shoot right and left.
Thirty or forty outsiders sent inside, and they tell us how the
affair was found out. A number of the ringleaders are undergoing
punishment. Hendryx has made his escape, and not been heard of since
yesterday. It is said he went away in full Confederate dress, armed,
and furnished with a guide to conduct him. Dr. Lewis died to-day.
Jack Walker told us about his death. Capt. Wirtz has posted up on the
inside a notice for us to read. The following is the notice:

  “NOTICE.

  Not wishing to shed the blood of hundreds not connected with those
  who concocted a plan to force the stockade, and make in this way
  their escape. I hereby warn the leaders and those who formed
  themselves into a band to carry out this, that I am in possession
  of all the facts, and have made my arrangements accordingly, so to
  frustrate it. No choice would be left me but to open with grape and
  cannister on the stockade, and what effect this would have in this
  densely crowded place need not be told. Signed,

  June 10, 1864.                  H. WIRTZ.”

June 11.—And so has ended a really colossal attempt at escape. George
Hendryx was one of the originators of the plan. He took advantage
of the excitement consequent upon its discovery and made good his
escape, and I hope will succeed in getting to our lines. It is the
same old situation here only worse, and getting worse all the time. I
am not very good at description, and find myself at fault in writing
down the horrible condition we are in.

June 12.—Rained every day so far this month. A portion of the camp
is a mud hole, and the men are obliged to lay down in it. Fort
Pillow prisoners tell some hard stories against the Confederacy at
the treatment they received after their capture. They came here
nearly _starved to death_, and a good many were wounded after their
surrender. They are mostly Tennesseeans, and a “right smart sorry
set.” Battese has taken quite a fatherly interest in me. Keeps right
on at the head of the washing and hair cutting business, paying no
attention to anything outside of his work. Says: “We get out all
right!”

June 13.—It is now as hot and sultry as it was ever my lot to
witness. The cloudy weather and recent rains make everything damp
and sticky. We don’t any of us sweat though, particularly, as we are
pretty well dried up. Laying on the ground so much has made sores on
nearly every one here, and in many cases gangrene sets in and they
are very bad off. Have many sores on my body, but am careful to keep
away the poison. To-day saw a man with a bullet hole in his head
over an inch deep, and you could look down in it and see maggots
squirming around at the bottom. Such things are terrible, but of
common occurrence. Andersonville seems to be head-quarters for all
the little pests that ever originated—flies by the thousand millions.
I have got into one bad scrape, and the one thing now is to get out
of it. Can do nothing but take as good care of myself as possible,
which I do. Battese works all the time at something. Has scrubbed his
hands sore, using sand for soap.

June 14.—Mike Hoare stalks around, cheerful, black and hungry. We
have long talks about our school days when little boys together. Mike
is a mason by trade, and was solicited to go out and work for the
rebels. Told them he would work on nothing but vaults to bury them
in. Is a loyal soldier and had rather die here than help them, as,
indeed, would a majority of the prisoners. To tell the truth, we are
so near death and see so much of it, that it is not dreaded as much
as a person would suppose. We stay here day after day, week after
week, and month after month, seemingly forgotten by all our friends
at the North, and then our sufferings are such that death is a relief
in the view of a great many, and not dreaded to any extent. By four
o’clock each day the row of dead at the gate would scare the life out
of me before coming here, while now it is nothing at all, but the
same thing over and over.

June 15.—I am sick; just able to drag around. My teeth are loose,
mouth sore, with gums grown down in some places lower than the teeth
and bloody, legs swollen up with dropsy and on the road to the
trenches. Where there is so much to write about, I can hardly write
anything. It’s the same old story and must necessarily be repetition.
Raiders now do just as they please, kill, plunder and steal in broad
daylight, with no one to molest them. Have been trying to organize
a police force, but cannot do it. Raiders are the stronger party.
Ground covered with maggots. Lice by the fourteen hundred thousand
million infest Andersonville. A favorite game among the boys is to
play at odd or even, by putting their hand inside some part of their
clothing, pull out what they can conveniently get hold of and say
“odd or even?” and then count up to see who beats. Think this is an
original game here, never saw it at the North. Some of the men claim
to have pet lice which they have trained. Am gradually growing worse.
Nothing but the good care I have taken of myself has saved me thus
far. I hope to last some time yet, and in the meantime relief may
come. My diary about written through. It may end about the same time
I do, which would be a fit ending.

June 16.—Old prisoners (some of them) will not credit the fact that
there is plenty to eat at the North. They think because we are
starved here, that it is so all over. They are crazy (as you may
say) on the subject of food, and no wonder. In our dreams we see and
eat bountiful repasts, and awake to the other extreme. Never could
get a chance to talk with Capt. Wirtz, as he comes inside no more.
Probably just as well. Is a thoroughly bad man, without an atom of
humanity about him. He will get killed, should we ever be released,
as there are a great many here who would consider it a christian duty
to rid the earth of his presence. Disease is taking right hold of me
now. Battese is an angel; takes better care of me than of himself.
Although not in our mess or tent, he is nearly all the time with
us. It is wonderful the powers of endurance he has. I have always
been blessed with friends, and friends, too, of the right sort. Had
quite a talk with Dorr Blakeman, a Jackson, Mich., boy. Was not much
acquainted with him at home but knew his people. Is a thoroughly good
fellow, and a sensible one. It is a relief to see any one who does
not lose his head.

June 17.—Must nurse my writing material. A New York _Herald_ in camp,
which says an exchange will commence the 7th of July. Gen. Winder is
on a visit to Andersonville. Is quite an aged man, and white haired.
Very warm and almost suffocating. Seems as if the sun was right after
us and belonged to the Confederacy. Chas. Humphrey, of Massachusetts,
who has been in our hundred for months, has gone crazy; wanders
about entirely naked, and not even a cap on his head. Many of the
prisoners are crazy, and I only speak of those in our immediate
proximity. Am in good spirits, notwithstanding my afflictions. Have
never really thought yet that I was going to die in this place or in
the Confederacy. Saw a newcomer pounded to a jelly by the raiders.
His cries for relief were _awful_, but none came. Must a few villains
live at the expense of so many? God help us from these worse than
rebels.

June 18.—Have now written two large books full; have another at hand.
New prisoners who come here have diaries which they will sell for a
piece of bread. No news to-day. Dying off as usual—more in numbers
each day as the summer advances. Rebels say that they don’t begin to
have hot weather down here until about August. Well, it is plain to
me that all will die. Old prisoners have stood it as long as they
can, and are dropping off fast, while the new ones go anyhow. Some
one stole my cap during the night. A dead neighbor furnished me with
another, however. Fast as the men die they are stripped of their
clothing so that those alive can be covered. Pretty hard, but the
best we can do. Rebels are anxious to get hold of Yankee buttons.
“Buttons with hens on,” they enquire for. An insult to the American
Eagle—but they don’t know any better.

June 19.—A young fellow named Conely tramps around the prison with
ball and chain on. His crime was trying to get away. I say he tramps
around, he tramps away from the gate with it on at nine in the
morning, and as soon as out of sight of the rebels he takes it off,
and only puts it on at nine o’clock the next morning to report at
the gate duly ironed off. They think, of course, that he wears it
all the time. Jimmy Devers looks and is in a very bad way. Too bad
if the poor fellow should die now, after being a prisoner almost a
year. Talks a great deal about his younger brother in Jackson, named
Willie. Says if he should die to be sure and tell Willie not to
drink, which has been one of Jimmy’s failings, and he sees now what a
foolish habit it is. Michael Hoare stands it well. When a man is shot
now it is called being “parolled.”

June 20.—All the mess slowly but none the less surely succumbing to
the diseases incident here. We are not what you may call hungry. I
have actually felt the pangs of hunger more when I was a boy going
home from school to dinner. But we are sick and faint and all broken
down, feverish &c. It is starvation and disease and exposure that is
doing it. Our stomachs have been so abused by the stuff called bread
and soups, that they are diseased. The bread is coarse and musty.
Believe that half in camp would die now if given rich food to eat.

June 21.—I am a fair writer, and am besieged by men to write letters
to the rebel officers praying for release, and I do it, knowing it
will do no good, but to please the sufferers. Some of these letters
are directed to Capt. Wirtz, some to Gen. Winder, Jeff Davis and
other officers. As dictated by them some would bring tears from a
stone. One goes on to say he has been a prisoner of war over a year,
has a wife and three children destitute, how much he thinks of them,
is dying with disease, etc., etc. All kinds of stories are narrated,
and handed to the first rebel who comes within reach. Of course they
are never heard from. It’s pitiful to see the poor wretches who think
their letters will get them out, watch the gate from day to day, and
always disappointed. Some one has much to answer for.

June 22.—The washing business progresses and is prosperous. One great
trouble is, it is run too loose and we often get no pay. Battese,
while a good worker, is no business man, and will do anybody’s
washing on promises, which don’t amount to much. Am not able to do
much myself, principally hanging out the clothes; that is, laying the
shirt on one of the tent poles and then watching it till dry. All day
yesterday I lay under the “coverlid” in the shade, hanging on to a
string which was tied to the washing. If I saw a suspicious looking
chap hanging around with his eyes on the washed goods, then gave a
quick jerk and in she comes out of harm’s way. Battese has paid for
three or four shirts lost in this way, and one pair of pants. Pays in
bread. A great many Irish here, and as a class, they stand hardships
well. Jimmy Devers losing heart and thinks he will die. Capt. Wirtz
has issued another order, but don’t know what it is—to the effect
that raiding and killing must be stopped, I believe. Being unable to
get around as I used to, do not hear the particulars of what is going
on, only in a general way. New men coming in, and bodies carried out.
Is there no end but dying?

June 23.—My coverlid nobly does duty, protecting us from the sun’s
hot rays by day and the heavy dews at night. Have no doubt but it
has saved my life many times. Never have heard anything from Hendryx
since his escape. Either got away to our lines or shot. Rebels
recruiting among us for men to put in their ranks. None will go—yes,
I believe one Duffy has gone with them. Much fighting. Men will
fight as long as they can stand up. A father fights his own son not
ten rods from us. Hardly any are strong enough to do much damage
except the raiders, who get enough to eat and are in better condition
than the rest. Four or five letters were delivered to their owners.
Were from their homes. Remarkable, as I believe this is the first
mail since our first coming here. Something wrong. Just shake in my
boots—shoes, I mean, (plenty of room) when I think what July and
August will do for us. Does not seem to me as if any can stand it.
After all, it’s hard killing a man. Can stand most anything.

June 24.—Almost July 1st, when Jimmy Devers will have been a prisoner
of war one year. Unless relief comes very soon he will die. I have
read in my earlier years about prisoners in the revolutionary war,
and other wars. It sounded noble and heroic to be a prisoner of war,
and accounts of their adventures were quite romantic; but the romance
has been knocked out of the prisoner of war business, higher than
a kite. It’s a fraud. All of the “Astor House Mess” now afflicted
with scurvy and dropsy more or less, with the exception of Battese,
and myself worst of any. Am fighting the disease, however, all the
time, and the growth is but slight. Take exercise every morning and
evening, when it is almost impossible for me to walk. Walk all over
before the sun comes up, drink of Battese’s medicine made of roots,
keep clear of vermin, talk and even laugh, and if I do die, it will
not be through neglect. Carpenter, the teamster who sold me the
boots, is about gone, and thank the Lord he has received his sixty
cents from me, in rations. Sorry for the poor fellow. Many who have
all along stood it nobly now begin to go under. Wm. B. Rowe, our tall
mess-mate, is quite bad off, still, he has an iron constitution and
will last some time yet.

June 25.—Another lead pencil wore down to less than an inch in
length, and must skirmish around for another one. New men bring
in writing material and pencils. To-day saw a New York _Herald_
of date June 11th, nothing in it about exchange, however. That is
all the news that particularly interests us, although accounts of
recent battles are favorable to the Union side. Our guards are
composed of the lowest element of the South—poor white trash. Very
ignorant, much more so than the negro. Some of them act as if they
never saw a gun before. The rebel adjutant does quite a business
selling vegetables to those of the prisoners who have money, and has
established a sutler stand not very far from our mess. Hub Dakin, an
old acquaintance, is a sort of clerk, and gets enough to eat thereby.
Hot! Hot! Raiders kill some one now every day. No restraint in the
least. Men who were no doubt respectable at home, are now the worst
villains in the world. One of them was sneaking about our quarters
during the night, and Sanders knocked him about ten feet with a
board. Some one of us must keep awake all the time, and on the watch,
fearing to loose what little we have.

June 26.—The same old story, only worse, worse. It seems all the time
it was as bad as could be, but is not. They die now like sheep—fully
a hundred each day. New prisoners come inside in squads of hundreds,
and in a few weeks are _all dead_. The change is too great and sudden
for them. Old prisoners stand it the best. Found a Jackson, Michigan
man, who says I am reported dead there. Am not, however, and may
appear to them yet. Jimmy Devers is very bad with the scurvy and
dropsy and will probably die if relief does not come. Sergt. Rowe
also is afflicted; in fact all the mess except Battese. He does all
the cooking now. He has made me a cane to walk with, brings water
from the well, and performs nearly all the manual labor for us. He
is a jewel, but a rough one.

June 27.—Raiders going on worse than ever before. A perfect
pandemonium. Something must be done, and that quickly. There is
danger enough from disease, without being killed by raiders. Any
moment fifty or a hundred of them are liable to pounce upon our mess,
knock right and left and take the very clothing off our backs. No one
is safe from them. It is hoped that the more peaceable sort will rise
in their might and put them down. Our misery is certainly complete
without this trouble added to it. We should die in peace anyway.
Battese has called his Indian friends all together, and probably a
hundred of us are banded together for self protection. The animal
predominates. All restraint is thrown off and the very Old Harry is
to pay. The farther advanced the summer, the death rate increases,
until they die off by scores. I walk around to see friends of a few
days ago and am told “dead.” Men stand it nobly and are apparently
ordinarily well, when all at once they go. Like a horse, that will
stand up until he drops dead. Some of the most horrible sights that
can possibly be, are common every day occurrances. See men laying all
around in the last struggles.

June 28.—It seems to me as if three times as many as ever before are
now going off, still I am told that about one hundred and thirty die
per day. The reason it seems worse, is because no sick are being
taken out now, and they all die here instead of at the hospital. Can
see the dead wagon loaded up with twenty or thirty bodies at a time,
two lengths, just like four foot wood is loaded on to a wagon at the
North, and away they go to the grave yard on a trot. Perhaps one or
two will fall off and get run over. No attention paid to that; they
are picked up on the road back after more. Was ever before in this
world anything so terrible happening? Many entirely naked.

June 29.—Capt. Wirtz sent inside a guard of fifteen or twenty to
arrest and take out quite a number of prisoners. They had the names
and would go right to their quarters and take them. Some tell-tale
traitor has been informing on them, for attempting to escape or
something. Wirtz punishes very hard now; so much worse than a few
months ago. Has numerous instruments of torture just outside the
gate. Sores afflict us now, and the Lord only knows what next.
Scurvy and scurvy sores, dropsy, not the least thing to eat that
can be called fit for any one, much less a sick man, water that to
drink is poison, no shelter, and surrounded by raiders liable to cut
our throats any time. Surely, this is a go. Have been reading over
the diary, and find nothing but grumbling and growlings. Had best
enumerate some of the better things of this life. I am able to walk
around the prison, although quite lame. Have black pepper to put in
our soups. Am as clean perhaps as any here, with good friends to talk
cheerful to. Then, too, the raiders will let us alone until about the
last, for some of them will get killed when they attack the “Astor
House Mess.” Am probably as well off as any here who are not raiders,
and I should be thankful, and am thankful. Will live probably two
or three months yet. “If t’weren’t for hope the heart would break,”
and I am hopeful yet. A Pennsylvanian of German descent, named Van
Tassel, and who has “sorter identified himself with us” for two or
three months, died a few moments ago. The worst cases of the sick
are again taken to the hospital—that is, a few of the worst cases.
Many prefer to die among their friends inside. Henry Clayton also
died to-day. Was at one time in charge of our Division, and an old
prisoner. Mike Hoare still hangs on nobly, as also do many other of
my friends and acquaintances. Dorr Blakeman stands it unusually well.
Have had no meat now for ten days; nothing but one-third of a loaf
of corn bread and half a pint of cow peas for each man, each day.
Wood is entirely gone, and occasionally squads allowed to go and get
some under guard. Rowe went out to-day, was not able to carry much,
and that had to be divided between a hundred men. One of the most
annoying things is being squadded over every few days, sick and all.
It’s an all day job, and have to stand out until we are all tired
out, never getting any food on these days.

June 30.—A new prisoner fainted away on his entrance to Andersonville
and is now crazy, a raving maniac. That is how our condition affected
him. My pants are the worse for wear from repeated washings, my shirt
sleeveless and feet stockingless; have a red cap without any front
piece; shoes by some hocus-pocus are not mates, one considerable
larger than the other. Wonder what they would think if I should
suddenly appear on the streets in Jackson in this garb. Would be a
circus; side show and all. But nights I have a grand old coverlid
to keep off the wet. Raiders steal blankets and sell to the guards,
which leaves all nearly destitute of that very necessary article.
Often tell how I got my coverlid, to visitors. Have been peddling
pea soup on the streets: “Ten cents in money or a dollar Confed for
this rich soup! Who takes it?” And some wretch buys it. Anything in
the way of food will sell, or water, if different from swamp water.
Rebs making a pretense of fixing up sanitary privileges at the swamp,
which amount to nothing. Strong talk of forming a police force to put
down raiders and to enforce order. If successful it will prove of
great benefit. Sanders, Rowe, Blakeman, Dakin and myself are among
those who will take an active part, although the part I take cannot
be very active. Half a dozen letters sent inside to prisoners, but no
news in them that I can hear of. More hot and sultry, with occasional
rains. The crazy man says nothing but “prayer” will save us. He has
been sucking a bone now for about two weeks and pays more attention
to that than to prayer.

July 1.—Matters must approach a crisis pretty soon with the raiders.
It is said that even the rebels are scared and think they will
have no prisoners, should an exchange ever occur. John Bowen, a
Corp. Christency, Hemmingway, Byron Goodsell and Pete Smith, old
acquaintances, have all died within a few days. Jimmy Devers still
lives, with wonderful tenacity to life. To-morrow he will have been
a prisoner of war a year. Mike Hoare still keeps very well, but the
most comical looking genius in the whole prison. Could make a fortune
out of him on exhibition at the North. He says I look worse however.
That may be, but not so comical. It’s tragedy with the most of us.
New guards are taking the place of the old ones, and it is said
that Wirtz is going away. Hope so. Never have heard one word from
Hendryx since his getting away. Sanders is trying to get outside as
a butcher. He understands the business. “Dad” has been to Australia,
and has told us all about that country. Have also heard all about
Ireland and Scotland. Should judge they were fine countries. Rowe
has been telling me of the advantage of silk under clothing, and in
addition to visiting all the foreign countries, we shall have silk
under wear. Rowe once lived in Boston, and I shall likewise go there.

July 2.—Almost the Glorious Fourth of July. How shall we celebrate?
Know of no way except to pound on the bake tin, which I shall do.
Have taken to rubbing my limbs, which are gradually becoming more
dropsical. Badly swollen. One of my teeth came out a few days ago,
and all are loose. Mouth very sore. Battese says: “We get away yet.”
Works around and always busy. If any news, he merely listens and
don’t say a word. Even he is in poor health, but never mentions it.
An acquaintance of his says he owns a good farm in Minnesota. Asked
him if he was married—says: “Oh, yes.” Any children? “Oh, yes.” This
is as far as we have got his history. Is very different from Indians
in general. Some of them here are despisable cowards—worse than the
negro. Probably one hundred negroes are here. Not so tough as the
whites. Dead line being fixed up by the rebels. Got down in some
places. Bought a piece of soap, first I have seen in many months.
Swamp now in frightful condition from the filth of camp. Vermin and
raiders have the best of it. Capt. Moseby still leads the villains.




THE RAIDERS PUT DOWN.

  ANDERSONVILLE ON ITS METAL—LEADING RAIDERS ARRESTED, TRIED AND
  HUNG—GREAT EXCITEMENT FOR A FEW DAYS, FOLLOWED BY GOOD ORDER—DEATH
  RATE INCREASES, HOWEVER—THE ASTOR HOUSE MESS AS POLICEMEN.


July 3.—Three hundred and fifty new men from West Virginia were
turned into this summer resort this morning. They brought good news
as to successful termination of the war, and they also caused war
after coming among us. As usual the raiders proceeded to rob them of
their valuables and a fight occurred in which hundreds were engaged.
The cut-throats came out ahead. Complaints were made to Capt. Wirtz
that this thing would be tolerated no longer, that these raiders must
be put down or the men would rise in their might and break away if
assistance was not given with which to preserve order. Wirtz flew
around as if he had never thought of it before, issued an order to
the effect that no more food would be given us until the leaders
were arrested and taken outside for trial. The greatest possible
excitement. Hundreds that have before been neutral and non-commital
are now joining a police force. Captains are appointed to take charge
of the squads which have been furnished with clubs by Wirtz. As I
write, this middle of the afternoon, the battle rages. The police go
right to raider head-quarters knock right and left and make their
arrests. Sometimes the police are whipped and have to retreat, but
they rally their forces and again make a charge in which they are
successful. Can lay in our shade and see the trouble go on. Must be
killing some by the shouting. The raiders fight for their very life,
and are only taken after being thoroughly whipped. The stockade
is loaded with guards who are fearful of a break. I wish I could
describe the scene to-day. A number killed. After each arrest a great
cheering takes place. NIGHT.—Thirty or forty have been taken outside
of the worst characters in camp, and still the good work goes on.
No food to-day and don’t want any. A big strapping fellow called
Limber Jim heads the police. Grand old Michael Hoare is at the front
and goes for a raider as quick as he would a rebel. Patrol the camp
all the time and gradually quieting down. The orderly prisoners are
feeling jolly.

July 4.—The men taken outside yesterday are under rebel guard and
will be punished. The men are thoroughly aroused, and now that the
matter has been taken in hand, it will be followed up to the letter.
Other arrests are being made to-day, and occasionally a big fight.
Little Terry, whom they could not find yesterday, was to-day taken.
Had been hiding in an old well, or hole in the ground. Fought like
a little tiger, but had to go. “Limber Jim” is a brick, and should
be made a Major General if he ever reaches our lines. Mike Hoare
is right up in rank, and true blue. Wm. B. Rowe also makes a good
policeman, as does “Dad” Sanders. Battese says he “no time to fight,
must wash.” Jimmy Devers regrets that he cannot take a hand in, as he
likes to fight, and especially with a club. The writer hereof does
no fighting, being on the sick list. The excitement of looking on is
most too much for me. Can hardly arrest the big graybacks crawling
around. Capt. Moseby is one of the arrested ones. His right name is
Collins and he has been in our hundred all the time since leaving
Richmond. Has got a good long neck to stretch. Another man whom I
have seen a good deal of, one Curtiss, is also arrested. I haven’t
mentioned poor little Bullock for months, seems to me. He was most
dead when we first came to Andersonville, and is still alive and
tottering around. Has lost his voice entirely and is nothing but a
skeleton. Hardly enough of him for disease to get hold of. Would
be one of the surprising things on record if he lives through it,
and he seems no worse than months ago. It is said that a court
will be formed of our own men to try the raiders. Any way, so they
are punished. All have killed men, and they themselves should be
killed. When arrested, the police had hard work to prevent their
being lynched. Police more thoroughly organizing all the time. An
extra amount of food this P. M., and police get extra rations, and
three out of our mess is doing pretty well, as they are all willing
to divide. They tell us all the encounters they have, and much
interesting talk. Mike has some queer experiences. Rebel flags at
half mast for some of their great men. Just heard that the trial of
raiders will begin to-morrow.

July 5.—Court is in session outside and raiders being tried by our
own men. Wirtz has done one good thing, but it’s a question whether
he is entitled to any credit, as he had to be threatened with a break
before he would assist us. Rations again to-day. I am quite bad off
with my diseases, but still there are so many thousands so much worse
off that I do not complain much, or try not to however.

July 6.—Boiling hot, camp reeking with filth, and no sanitary
privileges; men dying off over a hundred and forty per day. Stockade
enlarged, taking in eight or ten more acres, giving us more room, and
stumps to dig up for wood to cook with. Mike Hoare is in good health;
not so Jimmy Devers. Jimmy has now been a prisoner over a year, and
poor boy, will probably die soon. Have more mementoes than I can
carry, from those who have died, to be given to their friends at
home. At least a dozen have given me letters, pictures &c., to take
North. Hope I shan’t have to turn them over to some one else.

July 7.—The court was gotten up by our own men and from our own men;
Judge, jury, counsel, &c. Had a fair trial, and were even defended,
but to no purpose. It is reported that six have been sentenced to be
hung, while a good many others are condemned to lighter punishment,
such as setting in the stocks, strung up by the thumbs, thumb screws,
head hanging, etc. The court has been severe, but just. Mike goes
out to-morrow to take some part in the court proceedings. The prison
seems a different place altogether; still, dread disease is here, and
mowing down good and true men. Would seem to me that three or four
hundred died each day, though officially but one hundred and forty
odd is told. About twenty-seven thousand, I believe, are here now in
all. No new ones for a few days. Rebel visitors, who look at us from
a distance. It is said the stench keeps all away who have no business
here and can keep away. Washing business good. Am negotiating for
a pair of pants. Dislike fearfully to wear dead men’s clothes, and
haven’t to any great extent.

July 8.—Oh, how hot, and oh, how miserable. The news that six have
been sentenced to be hanged is true, and one of them is Moseby. The
camp is thoroughly under control of the police now, and it is a
heavenly boon. Of course there is some stealing and robbery, but not
as before. Swan, of our mess, is sick with scurvy. I am gradually
swelling up and growing weaker. But a few more pages in my diary.
Over a hundred and fifty dying per day now, and twenty-six thousand
in camp. Guards shoot now very often. Boys, as guards, are the most
cruel. It is said that if they kill a Yankee, they are given a thirty
days furlough. Guess they need them as soldiers too much to allow
of this. The swamp now is fearful, water perfectly reeking with
prison offal and poison. Still men drink it and die. Rumors that
the six will be hung inside. Bread to-day and it is so coarse as to
do more hurt than good to a majority of the prisoners. The place
still gets worse. Tunneling is over with; no one engages in it now
that I know of. The prison is a success as regards safety; no escape
except by death, and very many take advantage of that way. A man who
has preached to us (or tried to) is dead. Was a good man I verily
believe, and from Pennsylvania. It’s almost impossible for me to
get correct names to note down; the last named man was called “the
preacher,” and I can find no other name for him. Our quartette of
singers a few rods away is disbanded. One died, one nearly dead, one
a policeman and the other cannot sing alone, and so where we used to
hear and enjoy good music evenings, there is nothing to attract us
from the groans of the dying. Having formed a habit of going to sleep
as soon as the air got cooled off and before fairly dark, I wake
up at two or three o’clock and stay awake. I then take in all the
horrors of the situation. Thousands are groaning, moaning and crying,
with no bustle of the day time to drown it. Guards every half hour
call out the time and post, and there is often a shot to make one
shiver as if with the ague. Must arrange my sleeping hours to miss
getting owly in the morning. Have taken to building air castles of
late, on being exchanged. Getting loony, I guess, same as all the
rest.

[Illustration: Michael Hoare.

Now an inmate of the Home for Disabled Soldiers, Dayton, Ohio.]

July 9.—Battese brought me some onions, and if they ain’t good then
no matter; also a sweet potato. One-half the men here would get well
if they only had something in the vegetable line to eat, or acids.
Scurvy is about the most loathsome disease, and when dropsy takes
hold with the scurvy, it is terrible. I have both diseases but keep
them in check, and it only grows worse slowly. My legs are swollen,
but the cords are not contracted much, and I can still walk very
well. Our mess all keep clean, in fact are obliged to or else turned
adrift. We want none of the dirty sort in our mess. Sanders and Rowe
enforce the rules, which is not much work, as all hands are composed
of men who prefer to keep clean. I still do a little washing, but
more particularly hair cutting, which is easier work. You should see
one of my hair cuts. Nobby! Old prisoners have hair a foot long or
more, and my business is to cut it off, which I do without regards
to anything except to get it off. I should judge that there are one
thousand rebel soldiers guarding us, and perhaps a few more, with the
usual number of officers. A guard told me to-day that the yanks were
“gittin licked,” and they didn’t want us exchanged; just as soon we
should die here as not; a yank asked him if he knew what exchange
meant; said he knew what shootin’ meant, and as he began to swing
around his old shooting iron we retreated in among the crowd. Heard
that there were some new men belonging to my regiment in another
part of the prison; have just returned from looking after them and
am all tired out. Instead of belonging to the 9th Michigan Cavalry,
they belong to the 9th Michigan Infantry. Had a good visit and quite
cheered with their accounts of the war news. Some one stole Battese’s
wash board and he is mad; is looking for it—may bust up the business.
Think Hub Dakin will give me a board to make another one. Sanders
owns the jack knife, of this mess, and he don’t like to lend it
either; borrow it to carve on roots for pipes. Actually take solid
comfort “building castles in the air,” a thing I have never been
addicted to before. Better than getting blue and worrying myself to
death. After all, we may get out of this dod-rotted hole. Always an
end of some sort to such things.

July 10.—Have bought of a new prisoner quite a large (thick I mean,)
blank book so as to continue my diary. Although it’s a tedious and
tiresome task, am determined to keep it up. Don’t know of another man
in prison who is doing likewise. Wish I had the gift of description
that I might describe this place. Know that I am not good at such
things, and have more particularly kept track of the mess which was
the “Astor House Mess” on Belle Isle, and is still called so here.
Thought that Belle Isle was a very bad place, and used about the
worst language I knew how to use in describing it, and so find myself
at fault in depicting matters here as they are. At Belle Isle we had
good water and plenty of it, and I believe it depends more upon water
than food as regards health. We also had good pure air from up the
James River. Here we have the very worst kind of water. Nothing can
be worse or nastier than the stream drizzling its way through this
camp. And for air to breathe, it is what arises from this foul place.
On all four sides of us are high walls and tall trees, and there is
apparently no wind or breeze to blow away the stench, and we are
obliged to breathe and live in it. Dead bodies lay around all day in
the broiling sun, by the dozen and even hundreds, and we must suffer
and live in this atmosphere. It’s too horrible for me to describe in
fitting language. There was once a very profane man driving a team
of horses attached to a wagon in which there were forty or fifty
bushels of potatoes. It was a big load and there was a long hill to
go up. The very profane man got off the load of potatoes to lighten
the weight, and started the team up the hill. It was hard work, but
they finally reached the top and stopped to rest. The profane man
looked behind him and saw that the end board of the wagon had slipped
out just as he had started, and there the potatoes were, scattered
all the way along up the hill. Did the man make the very air blue
with profanity? No, he sat down on a log feeling that he couldn’t do
the subject justice and so he remarked: “No! it’s no use, I can’t do
it justice.” While I have no reason or desire to swear, I certainly
cannot do this prison justice. It’s too stupenduous an undertaking.
Only those who are here will ever know what Andersonville is.


AN ACCOUNT OF THE HANGING.

July 11.—This morning lumber was brought into the prison by the
rebels, and near the gate a _gallows_ erected for the purpose of
executing the six condemned Yankees. At about ten o’clock they were
brought inside by Capt. Wirtz and some guards, and delivered over
to the police force. Capt. Wirtz then said a few words about their
having been tried by our own men and for us to do as we choose with
them, that he washed his hands of the whole matter, or words to that
effect. I could not catch the exact language, being some little
distance away. I have learned by enquiry, their names, which are
as follows: John Sarsfield, 144th New York; William Collins, alias
“Moseby,” Co. D, 88th Pennsylvania; Charles Curtiss, Battery A, 5th
Rhode Island Artillery; Pat Delaney, Co. E, 83d Pennsylvania; A.
Munn, U. S. Navy, and W. R. Rickson of the U. S. Navy. After Wirtz
made his speech he withdrew his guards, leaving the condemned at
the mercy of 28,000 enraged prisoners who had all been more or less
wronged by these men. Their hands were tied behind them, and one by
one they mounted the scaffold. Curtiss, who was last, a big stout
fellow, managed to get his hands loose and broke away and ran through
the crowd and down toward the swamp. It was yelled out that he had
a knife in his hand, and so a path was made for him. He reached
the swamp and plunged in, trying to get over on the other side,
presumably among his friends. It being very warm he over exerted
himself, and when in the middle or thereabouts, collapsed and could
go no farther. The police started after him, waded in and helped him
out. He pleaded for water and it was given him. Then led back to the
scaffold and helped to mount up. All were given a chance to talk.
Munn, a good looking fellow in marine dress, said he came into the
prison four months before perfectly honest, and as innocent of crime
as any fellow in it. Starvation, with evil companions, had made him
what he was. He spoke of his mother and sisters in New York, that he
cared nothing as far as he himself was concerned, but the news that
would be carried home to his people made him want to curse God he had
ever been born. Delaney said he would rather be hung than live here
as the most of them lived, on their allowance of rations. If allowed
to steal could get enough to eat, but as that was stopped had rather
hang. Bid all good bye. Said his name was not Delaney and that no
one knew who he really was, therefore his friends would never know
his fate, his Andersonville history dying with him. Curtiss said he
didn’t care a ——, only hurry up and not be talking about it all day;
making too much fuss over a very small matter. William Collins, alias
Moseby, said he was innocent of murder and ought not to be hung; he
had stolen blankets and rations to preserve his own life, and begged
the crowd not to see him hung as he had a wife and child at home,
and for their sake to let him live. The excited crowd began to be
impatient for the “show” to commence as they termed it. Sarsfield
made quite a speech; he had studied for a lawyer; at the outbreak of
the rebellion he had enlisted and served three years in the army,
been wounded in battle, furloughed home, wound healed up, promoted to
first sergeant and also commissioned; his commission as a lieutenant
had arrived but had not been mustered in when he was taken prisoner;
began by stealing parts of rations, gradually becoming hardened as
he became familiar with the crimes practiced; evil associates had
helped him to go down hill and here he was. The other did not care
to say anything. While the men were talking they were interrupted by
all kinds of questions and charges made by the crowd, such as “don’t
lay it on too thick, you villain,” “get ready to jump off,” “cut it
short,” “you was the cause of so and so’s death,” “less talk and more
hanging,” &c., &c. At about eleven o’clock they were all blindfolded,
hands and feet tied, told to get ready, nooses adjusted and the
plank knocked from under. Moseby’s rope broke and he fell to the
ground, with blood spurting from his ears, mouth and nose. As they
was lifting him back to the swinging off place he revived and begged
for his life, but no use, was soon dangling with the rest, and died
very hard. Munn died easily, as also did Delaney, all the rest died
hard and particularly Sarsfield who drew his knees nearly to his chin
and then straightened them out with a jerk, the veins in his neck
swelling out as if they would burst. It was an awful sight to see,
still a necessity. Moseby, although he said he had never killed any
one, and I don’t believe he ever did deliberately kill a man, such
as stabbing or pounding a victim to death, yet he has walked up to
a poor sick prisoner on a cold night and robbed him of blanket, or
perhaps his rations and if necessary using all the force necessary
to do it. These things were the same as life to the sick man, for he
would invariably die. The result has been that many have died from
his robbing propensities. It was right that he should hang, and he
did hang most beautifully and Andersonville is the better off for
it. None of the rest denied that they had killed men, and probably
some had murdered dozens. It has been a good lesson; there are still
bad ones in camp but we have the strong arm of the law to keep them
in check. All during the hanging scene the stockade was covered
with rebels, who were fearful a break would be made if the raiders
should try and rescue them. Many citizens too were congregated on the
outside in favorable positions for seeing. Artillery was pointed at
us from all directions ready to blow us all into eternity in short
order; Wirtz stood on a high platform in plain sight of the execution
and says we are a hard crowd to kill our own men. After hanging
for half an hour or so the six bodies were taken down and carried
outside. In noting down the speeches made by the condemned men, have
used my own language; in substance it is the same as told by them. I
occupied a near position to the hanging and saw it all from first to
last, and stood there until they were taken down and carried away.
Was a strange sight to see and the first hanging I ever witnessed.
The raiders had many friends who crowded around and denounced the
whole affair and but for the police there would have been a riot;
many both for and against the execution were knocked down. Some
will talk and get into trouble thereby; as long as it does no good
there is no use in loud talk and exciting arguments; is dangerous
to advance any argument, men are so ready to quarrel. Have got back
to my quarters thoroughly prostrated and worn out with fatigue and
excitement, and only hope that to-day’s lesson will right matters
as regards raiding. Battese suspended washing long enough to look
on and see them hang and grunted his approval. Have omitted to say
that the good Catholic priest attended the condemned. Rebel negroes
came inside and began to take down the scaffold; prisoners took hold
to help them and resulted in its all being carried off to different
parts of the prison to be used for kindling wood, and the rebels get
none of it back and are mad. The ropes even have been gobbled up,
and I suppose sometime may be exhibited at the north as mementoes
of to-day’s proceedings. Mike Hoare assisted at the hanging. Some
fears are entertained that those who officiated will get killed by
the friends of those hanged. The person who manipulated the “drop,”
has been taken outside on parole of honor, as his life would be in
danger in here. Jimmy thanks God that he has lived to see justice
done the raiders; he is about gone—nothing but skin and bone and
can hardly move hand or foot; rest of the mess moderately well. The
extra rations derived from our three mess-mates as policemen, helps
wonderfully to prolong life. Once in a while some of them gets a
chance to go outside on some duty and buy onions or sweet potatoes
which is a great luxury.

July 12.—Good order has prevailed since the hanging. The men have
settled right down to the business of living, with no interruption.
I keep thinking our situation can get no worse, but it does get
worse every day and not less than one hundred and sixty die each
twenty-four hours. Probably one-fourth or one-third of these die
inside the stockade, the balance in the hospital outside. All day and
up to four o’clock P. M., the dead are being gathered up and carried
to the south gate and placed in a row inside the dead line. As the
bodies are stripped of their clothing in most cases as soon as the
breath leaves, and in some cases before, the row of dead presents
a sickening appearance. Legs drawn up and in all shapes. They are
black from pitch pine smoke and laying in the sun. Some of them lay
there for twenty hours or more, and by that time are in a horrible
condition. At four o’clock a four or six mule wagon comes up to the
gate and twenty or thirty bodies are loaded on to the wagon and they
are carted off to be put in trenches, one hundred in each trench,
in the cemetery, which is eighty or a hundred rods away. There must
necessarily be a great many whose names are not taken. It is the
orders to attach the name, company and regiment to each body, but it
is not always done. I was invited to-day to dig in a tunnel, but had
to decline. My digging days are over. Must dig now to keep out of the
ground, I guess. It is with difficulty now that I can walk, and only
with the help of two canes.

July 13.—Can see in the distance the cars go poking along by this
station, with wheezing old engines, snorting along. As soon as night
comes a great many are blind, caused by sleeping in the open air,
with moon shining in the face. Many holes are dug and excavations
made in camp. Near our quarters is a well about five or six feet
deep, and the poor blind fellows fall into this pit hole. None
seriously hurt, but must be quite shaken up. Half of the prisoners
have no settled place for sleeping, wander and lay down wherever they
can find room. Have two small gold rings on my finger, worn ever
since I left home. Have also a small photograph album with eight
photographs in. Relics of civilization. Should I get these things
through to our lines they will have quite a history. When I am among
the rebels I wind a rag around my finger to cover up the rings, or
else take them and put in my pocket. Bad off as I have been, have
never seen the time yet that I would part with them. Were presents
to me, and the photographs have looked at about one-fourth of the
time since imprisonment. One prisoner made some buttons here for his
little boy at home, and gave them to me to deliver, as he was about
to die. Have them sewed on to my pants for safe keeping.

July 14.—We have been too busy with the raiders of late to
manufacture any exchange news, and now all hands are at work trying
to see who can tell the biggest yarns. The weak are feeling well
to-night over the story that we are all to be sent North this
month, before the 20th. Have not learned that the news came from
any reliable source. Rumors of midsummer battles with Union troops
victorious. It’s “bite dog, bite bear,” with most of us prisoners;
we don’t care which licks, what we want is to get out of this pen.
Of course, we all care and want our side to win, but it’s tough on
patriotism. A court is now held every day and offenders punished,
principally by buck and gagging, for misdemeanors. The hanging has
done worlds of good, still there is much stealing going on yet,
but in a sly way, not openly. Hold my own as regards health. The
dreaded month of July is half gone, almost, and a good many over one
hundred and fifty die each day, but I do not know how many. Hardly
any one cares enough about it to help me any in my inquiries. It is
all self with the most of them. A guard by accident shot himself.
Have often said they didn’t know enough to hold a gun. Bury a rebel
guard every few days within sight of the prison. Saw some women in
the distance. Quite a sight. Are feeling quite jolly to-night since
the sun went down. Was visited by my new acquaintances of the 9th
Michigan Infantry, who are comparatively new prisoners. Am learning
them the way to live here. They are very hopeful fellows and declare
the war will be over this coming fall, and tell their reasons very
well for thinking so. We gird up our loins and decide that we will
try to live it through. Rowe, although often given to despondency,
is feeling good and cheerful. There are some noble fellows here. A
man shows exactly what he is in Andersonville. No occasion to be any
different from what you really are. Very often see a great big fellow
in size, in reality a baby in action, actually sniveling and crying,
and then again you will see some little runt, “not bigger than a pint
of cider,” tell the big fellow to “brace up” and be a man. Stature
has nothing to do as regards nerve, still there are noble big fellows
as well as noble little ones. A Sergt. Hill is judge and jury now,
and dispenses justice to evil doers with impartiality. A farce is
made of defending some of the arrested ones. Hill inquires all of the
particulars of each case, and sometimes lets the offenders go as
more sinned against than sinning. Four receiving punishment.

July 15.—Blank cartridges were this morning fired over the camp by
the artillery, and immediately the greatest commotion outside. It
seems that the signal in case a break is made, is cannon firing. And
this was to show us how quick they could rally and get into shape.
In less time than it takes for me to write it, all were at their
posts and in condition to open up and kill nine-tenths of all here.
Sweltering hot. Dying off one hundred and fifty-five each day. There
are twenty-eight thousand confined here now.

July 16.—Well, who ever supposed that it could be any hotter; but
to-day is more so than yesterday, and yesterday more than the day
before. My coverlid has been rained on so much and burned in the
sun, first one and then the other, that it is getting the worse for
wear. It was originally a very nice one, and home made. Sun goes
right through it now, and reaches down for us. Just like a bake oven.
The rabbit mules that draw in the rations look as if they didn’t
get much more to eat than we do. Driven with one rope line, and
harness patched up with ropes, strings, &c. Fit representation of
the Confederacy. Not much like U. S. Army teams. A joke on the rebel
adjutant has happened. Some one broke into the shanty and tied the
two or three sleeping there, and carried off all the goods. Tennessee
Bill, (a fellow captured with me) had charge of the affair, and is in
disgrace with the adjutant on account of it. Every one is glad of the
robbery. Probably there was not ten dollars worth of things in there,
but they asked outrageous prices for everything. Adjt. very mad, but
no good. Is a small, sputtering sort of fellow.

July 17.—Cords contracting in my legs and very difficult for me to
walk—after going a little ways have to stop and rest and am faint. Am
urged by some to go to the hospital but don’t like to do it; mess say
had better stay where I am, and Battese says shall not go, and that
settles it. Jimmy Devers anxious to be taken to the hospital but is
pursuaded to give it up. Tom McGill, another Irish friend, is past
all recovery; is in another part of the prison. Many old prisoners
are dropping off now this fearful hot weather; knew that July and
August would thin us out; cannot keep track of them in my disabled
condition. A fellow named Hubbard with whom I have conversed a good
deal, is dead; a few days ago was in very good health, and its only a
question of a few days now with any of us. Succeeded in getting four
small onions about as large as hickory nuts, tops and all for two
dollars Confederate money. Battese furnished the money but won’t eat
an onion; ask him if he is afraid it will make his breath smell? It
is said that two or three onions or a sweet potato eaten raw daily
will cure the scurvy. What a shame that such things are denied us,
being so plenty the world over. Never appreciated such things before
but shall hereafter. Am talking as if I expected to get home again. I
do.

July 18.—Time slowly dragging itself along. Cut some wretchs hair
most every day. Have a sign out “Hair Cutting,” as well as “Washing,”
and by the way, Battese has a new wash board made from a piece of the
scaffold lumber. About half the time do the work for nothing, in fact
not more than one in three or four pays anything—expenses not much
though, don’t have to pay any rent. All the mess keeps their hair cut
short which is a very good advertisement. My eyes getting weak with
other troubles. Can just hobble around. Death rate more than ever,
reported one hundred and sixty-five per day; said by some to be more
than that, but 165 is about the figure. Bad enough without making
any worse than it really is. Jimmy Devers most dead and begs us to
take him to the hospital and guess will have to. Every morning the
sick are carried to the gate in blankets and on stretchers, and the
worst cases admitted to the hospital. Probably out of five or six
hundred half are admitted. Do not think any lives after being taken
there; are past all human aid. Four out of every five prefer to stay
inside and die with their friends rather than go to the hospital.
Hard stories reach us of the treatment of the sick out there and I am
sorry to say the cruelty emanates from our own men who act as nurses.
These dead beats and bummer nurses are the same bounty jumpers the U.
S. authorities have had so much trouble with. Do not mean to say that
all the nurses are of that class but a great many of them are.

July 19.—There is no such thing as delicacy here. Nine out of ten
would as soon eat with a corpse for a table as any other way. In the
middle of last night I was awakened by being kicked by a dying man.
He was soon dead. In his struggles he had floundered clear into our
bed. Got up and moved the body off a few feet, and again went to
sleep to dream of the hideous sights. I can never get used to it as
some do. Often wake most scared to death, and shuddering from head to
foot. Almost dread to go to sleep on this account. I am getting worse
and worse, and prison ditto.

July 20.—Am troubled with poor sight together with scurvy and dropsy.
My teeth are all loose and it is with difficulty I can eat. Jimmy
Devers was taken out to die to-day. I hear that McGill is also
dead. John McGuire died last night, both were Jackson men and old
acquaintances. Mike Hoare is still policeman and is sorry for me.
Does what he can. And so we have seen the last of Jimmy. A prisoner
of war one year and eighteen days. Struggled hard to live through
it, if ever any one did. Ever since I can remember have known him.
John Maguire also, I have always known. Everybody in Jackson, Mich.,
will remember him, as living on the east side of the river near the
wintergreen patch, and his father before him. They were one of the
first families who settled that country. His people are well to do,
with much property. Leaves a wife and one boy. Tom McGill is also a
Jackson boy and a member of my own company. Thus you will see that
three of my acquaintances died the same day, for Jimmy cannot live
until night I don’t think. Not a person in the world but would have
thought either one of them would kill me a dozen times enduring
hardships. Pretty hard to tell about such things. Small squad of poor
deluded Yanks turned inside with us, captured at Petersburg. It is
said they talk of winning recent battles. Battese has traded for an
old watch and Mike will try to procure vegetables for it from the
guard. That is what will save us if anything.

July 21.—And rebels are still fortifying. Battese has his hands full.
Takes care of me like a father. Hear that Kilpatrick is making a raid
for this place. Troops (rebel) are arriving here by every train to
defend it. Nothing but corn bread issued now and I cannot eat it any
more.

July 22.—A petition is gotten up signed by all the sergeants in the
prison, to be sent to Washington, D. C., _begging_ to be released.
Capt. Wirtz has consented to let three representatives go for that
purpose. Rough that it should be necessary for us to _beg_ to be
protected by our government.

July 23.—Reports of an exchange in August. Can’t stand it till that
time. Will soon go up the spout.

July 24.—Have been trying to get into the hospital, but Battese won’t
let me go. Geo. W. Hutchins, brother of Charlie Hutchins of Jackson,
Mich., died to-day—from our mess. Jimmy Devers is dead.

July 25.—Rowe getting very bad. Sanders ditto. Am myself much worse,
and cannot walk, and with difficulty stand up. Legs drawn up like
a triangle, mouth in terrible shape, and dropsy worse than all. A
few more days. At my earnest solicitation was carried to the gate
this morning, to be admitted to the hospital. Lay in the sun for
some hours to be examined, and finally my turn came and I tried to
stand up, but was so excited I fainted away. When I came to myself
I lay along with the row of dead on the outside. Raised up and
asked a rebel for a drink of water, and he said: “Here, you Yank,
if you ain’t dead, get inside there!” And with his help was put
inside again. Told a man to go to our mess and tell them to come to
the gate, and pretty soon Battese and Sanders came and carried me
back to our quarters; and here I am, completely played out. Battese
flying around to buy me something good to eat. Can’t write much more.
Exchange rumors.

July 26.—Ain’t dead yet. Actually laugh when I think of the rebel who
thought if I wasn’t dead I had better get inside. Can’t walk a step
now. Shall try for the hospital no more. Had an onion.

July 27.—Sweltering hot. No worse than yesterday. Said that two
hundred die now each day. Rowe very bad and Sanders getting so. Swan
dead, Gordon dead, Jack Withers dead, Scotty dead, a large Irishman
who has been near us a long time is dead. These and scores of others
died yesterday and day before. Hub Dakin came to see me and brought
an onion. He is just able to crawl around himself.

July 28.—Taken a step forward toward the trenches since yesterday,
and am worse. Had a wash all over this morning. Battese took me to
the creek; carries me without any trouble.

July 29.—Alive and kicking. Drank some soured water made from meal
and water.

July 30.—Hang on well, and no worse.

[Illustration: (decorative separator)]




MOVED JUST IN TIME.

  REMOVED FROM ANDERSONVILLE TO THE MARINE HOSPITAL, SAVANNAH—GETTING
  THROUGH THE GATE—BATTESE HAS SAVED US—VERY SICK BUT BY NO MEANS
  DEAD YET—BETTER AND HUMANE TREATMENT.


Aug. 1.—Just about the same. My Indian friend says: “We all get away.”

Aug. 2.—Two hundred and twenty die each day. No more news of exchange.

Aug. 3.—Had some good soup, and feel better. All is done for me
that can be done by my friends. Rowe and Sanders in almost as bad a
condition as myself. Just about where I was two or three weeks ago.
Seem to have come down all at once. August goes for them.

Aug. 4.—Storm threatened. Will cool the atmosphere. Hard work to
write.

Aug. 5.—Severe storm. Could die in two hours if I wanted to, but
don’t.

Aug. 12.—Warm. Warm. Warm. If I only had some shade to lay in, and a
glass of lemonade.

Aug. 13.—A nice spring of cold water has broken out in camp, enough
to furnish nearly all here with drinking water. God has not forgotten
us. Battese brings it to me to drink.

Aug. 14.—Battese very hopeful, as exchange rumors are afloat. Talks
more about it than ever before.

Aug. 15.—The water is a God-send. Sanders better and Rowe worse.

Aug. 16.—Still in the land of the living. Capt. Wirtz is sick and a
Lieut. Davis acting in his stead.

Aug. 17.—Hanging on yet. A good many more than two hundred and
twenty-five die now in twenty-four hours. Messes that have stopped
near us are all dead.

Aug. 18.—Exchange rumors.

Aug. 19.—Am still hoping for relief. Water is bracing some up, myself
with others. Does not hurt us.

Aug. 20.—Some say three hundred now die each day. No more new men
coming. Reported that Wirtz is dead.

Aug. 21.—Sleep nearly all the time except when too hot to do so.

Aug. 22—Exchange rumors.

Aug. 23.—Terribly hot.

Aug. 24.—Had some soup. Not particularly worse, but Rowe is, and
Sanders also.

Aug. 25.—In my exuberance of joy must write a few lines. Received
a letter from my brother, George W. Ransom, from Hilton Head.[A]
Contained only a few words.

[A] My brother supposed me dead, as I had been so reported; still,
thinking it might not be so, every week or so he would write a letter
and direct to me as a prisoner of war. This letter, very strangely,
reached its destination.

Aug. 26.—Still am writing. The letter from my brother has done good
and cheered me up. Eye sight very poor and writing tires me. Battese
sticks by; such disinterested friendship is rare. Prison at its worst.

Aug. 27.—Have now written nearly through three large books, and still
at it. The diary am confident will reach my people if I don’t. There
are many here who are interested and will see that it goes north.

Aug. 28.—No news and no worse; set up part of the time. Dying off a
third faster than ever before.

Aug. 29.—Exchange rumors afloat. Any kind of a change would help me.

Aug. 30.—Am in no pain whatever, and no worse.

Aug. 31.—Still waiting for something to turn up. My Indian friend
says: “good news yet.” NIGHT.—The camp is full of exchange rumors.

Sept 1.—Sanders taken outside to butcher cattle. Is sick but goes
all the same. Mike sick and no longer a policeman. Still rumors of
exchange.

Sept. 2.—Just about the same; rumors afloat does me good. Am the most
hopeful chap on record.

Sept. 3.—Trade off my rations for some little luxury and manage to
get up quite a soup. LATER.—Sanders sent in to us a quite large piece
of fresh beef and a little salt; another God-send.

Sept. 4.—Anything good to eat lifts me right up, and the beef soup
has done it.

Sept. 4.—The beef critter is a noble animal. Very decided exchange
rumors.

Sept. 5.—The nice spring of cold water still flows and furnishes
drinking water for all; police guard it night and day so to be taken
away only in small quantities. Three hundred said to be dying off
each day.

Sept. 6.—Hurrah! Hurrah!! Hurrah!!! Can’t holler except on paper.
Good news. Seven detachments ordered to be ready to go at a moment’s
notice. LATER.—_All who cannot walk must stay behind._ If left
behind shall die in twenty-four hours. Battese says _I shall go_.
LATER.—Seven detachments are going out of the gate; all the sick are
left behind. Ours is the tenth detachment and will go to-morrow so
said. The greatest excitement; men wild with joy. Am worried fearful
that I cannot go, but Battese says I shall.

Sept. 7.—Anxiously waiting the expected summons. Rebels say as soon
as transportation comes, and so a car whistle is music to our ears.
Hope is a good medicine and am sitting up and have been trying to
stand up but can’t do it; legs too crooked and with every attempt
get faint. Men laugh at the idea of my going, as the rebels are very
particular not to let any sick go, still Battese say I am going.
MOST DARK.—Rebels say we go during the night when transportation
comes. Battese grinned when this news come and can’t get his face
straightened out again.


MARINE HOSPITAL, Savannah, Ga., Sept. 15, 1864.—A great change has
taken place since I last wrote in my diary. Am in heaven now compared
with the past. At about midnight, September 7th, our detachment
was ordered outside at Andersonville, and Battese picked me up and
carried me to the gate. The men were being let outside in ranks of
four, and counted as they went out. They were very strict about
letting none go but the well ones, or those who could walk. The
rebel adjutant stood upon a box by the gate, watching very close.
Pitch pine knots were burning in the near vicinity to give light.
As it came our turn to go Battese got me in the middle of the rank,
stood me up as well as I could stand, and with himself on one side
and Sergt. Rowe on the other began pushing our way through the gate.
Could not help myself a particle, and was so faint that I hardly knew
what was going on. As we were going through the gate the adjutant
yells out: “Here, here! hold on there, that man can’t go, hold on
there!” and Battese crowding right along outside. The adjutant struck
over the heads of the men and tried to stop us, but my noble Indian
friend kept straight ahead, hallooing: “He all right, he well, he
go!” And so I got outside, and adjutant having too much to look after
to follow me. After we were outside, I was carried to the railroad
in the same coverlid which I fooled the rebel out of when captured,
and which I presume has saved my life a dozen times. We were crowded
very thick into box cars. I was nearly dead, and hardly knew where we
were or what was going on. We were two days in getting to Savannah.
Arrived early in the morning. The railroads here run in the middle of
very wide, handsome streets. We were unloaded, I should judge, near
the middle of the city. The men as they were unloaded, fell into line
and were marched away. Battese got me out of the car, and laid me on
the pavement. They then obliged him to go with the rest, leaving me;
would not let him take me. I lay there until noon with four or five
others, without any guard. Three or four times negro servants came
to us from houses near by, and gave us water, milk and food. With
much difficulty I could set up, but was completely helpless. A little
after noon a wagon came and _toted_ us to a temporary hospital in
the outskirts of the city, and near a prison pen they had just built
for the well ones. Where I was taken it was merely an open piece of
ground, having wall tents erected and a line of guards around it. I
was put into a tent and lay on the coverlid. That night some gruel
was given to me, and a nurse whom I had seen in Andersonville looked
in, and my name was taken. The next morning, September 10th, I woke
up and went to move my hands, and could not do it; could not move
either limb so much as an inch. Could move my head with difficulty.
Seemed to be paralyzed, but in no pain whatever. After a few hours
a physician came to my tent, examined and gave me medicine, also
left medicine, and one of the nurses fed me some soup or gruel. By
night I could move my hands. Lay awake considerable through the
night thinking. Was happy as a clam in high tide. Seemed so nice to
be under a nice clean tent, and there was such cool pure air. The
surroundings were so much better that I thought now would be a good
time to die, and I didn’t care one way or the other. Next morning
the doctor came, and with him Sergt. Winn. Sergt. Winn I had had a
little acquaintance with at Andersonville. Doctor said I was terribly
reduced, but he thought I would improve. Told them to wash me. A
nurse came and washed me, and Winn brought me a white cotton shirt,
and an old but clean pair of pants; my old clothing, which was in
rags, was taken away. Two or three times during the day I had gruel
of some kind, I don’t know what. Medicine was given me by the nurses.
By night I could move my feet and legs a little. The cords in my feet
and legs were contracted so, of course, that I couldn’t straighten
myself out. Kept thinking to myself, “am I really away from that
place Andersonville?” It seemed too good to be true. On the morning
of the 12th, ambulances moved all to the Marine Hospital, or rather
an orchard in same yard with Marine Hospital, where thirty or forty
nice new tents have been put up, with bunks about two feet from the
ground, inside. Was put into a tent. By this time could move my arms
considerable. We were given vinegar weakened with water, and also
salt in it. Had medicine. My legs began to get movable more each day,
also my arms, and to-day I am laying on my stomach and writing in my
diary. Mike Hoare is also in this hospital. One of my tent mates is a
man named Land, who is a printer, same as myself. I hear that Wm. B.
Rowe is here also, but haven’t seen him.

Sept. 16.—How I do sleep; am tired out, and seems to me I can just
sleep till doomsday.

Sept. 17.—Four in each tent. A nurse raises me up, sitting posture,
and there I stay for hours, dozing and talking away. Whiskey given us
in very small quantities, probably half a teaspoonful in half a glass
of something, I don’t know what. Actually makes me drunk. I am in no
pain whatever.

Sept. 18.—Surgeon examined me very thoroughly to-day. Have some bad
sores caused by laying down so much; put something on them that makes
them ache. Sergt. Winn gave me a pair of socks.

Sept. 19.—A priest gave me some alum for my sore mouth. Had a piece
of sweet potato, but couldn’t eat it. Fearfully weak. Soup is all I
can eat, and don’t always stay down.

Sept. 20.—Too cool for me. The priest said he would come and see me
often. Good man. My left hand got bruised in some way and rebel done
it up. He is afraid gangrene will get in sore. Mike Hoare is quite
sick.

Sept. 21.—Don’t feel as well as I did some days ago. Can’t eat; still
can use my limbs and arms more.

Sept. 22.—Good many sick brought here. Everybody is kind, rebels and
all. Am now differently sick than at any other time. Take lots of
medicine, eat nothing but gruel. Surgeons are very attentive. Man
died in my tent. Oh, if I was away by myself, I would get well. Don’t
want to see a sick man. That makes me sick.

Sept. 23.—Shall write any way; have to watch nurses and rebels or
will lose my diary. Vinegar reduced I drink and it is good; crave
after acids and salt. Mouth appears to be actually sorer than ever
before, but whether it is worse or not can’t say. Sergt. Winn says
the Doctor says that I must be very careful if I want to get well.
How in the old Harry can I be careful? They are the ones that had
better be careful and give me the right medicine and food. Gruel made
out of a dish cloth to eat.

Sept 24.—Arrowroot soup or whatever you may call it; don’t like it;
makes me sick. Priest spoke to me. Cross and peevish and they say
that is a sure sign will get well. Ain’t sure but shall be a Catholic
yet. Every little while get out the old diary from under the blanket
and write a sentence. Never was made to be sick—too uneasy. This will
do for to-day.

[Illustration: (separator; small circular coastal scene)]




HOSPITAL LIFE.

  A GRADUAL IMPROVEMENT IN HEALTH—GOOD TREATMENT WHICH IS
  OPPORTUNE—PARTING WITH RELICS TO BUY LUXURIES—DALY, THE TEAMSTER AT
  ANDERSONVILLE, KILLED—A VISIT FROM BATTESE THE INDIAN, ETC., ETC.


Sept. 25—Can eat better—or drink rather; some rebel general dead and
buried with honors outside. Had another wash and general clean up;
ocean breezes severe for invalids. Am visited twice a day by the
rebel surgeon who instructs nurses about treatment. Food principally
arrow root; have a little whisky. Sleep great deal of the time.
Land, my acquaintance and mess-mate, is lame from scurvy, but is not
weak and sick as I am. When I think of anything, say: “Land, put her
down,” and he writes what I tell him. Everything clean here, but then
any place is clean after summering in Andersonville. Don’t improve
much and sometimes not at all; get blue sometimes; nature of the
beast suppose; other sick in the tent worry and make me nervous.

Sept. 26—Am really getting better and hopeful. Battese has the
two first books of my diary; would like to see him. Was mistaken
about Rowe being in the hospital; he is not, but I hear is in the
big stockade with bulk of prisoners. Say we were removed from
Andersonville for the reason that our troops were moving that way.
Well, thank heaven they moved that way. Mike Hoare, the irrepressible
Irishman, is hobbling around and in our tent about half the time;
is also getting well. Quite a number die here not having the
constitution to rally. This is the first hospital I was ever in. My
old coverlid was washed and fumigated the first day in hospital. Am
given very little to eat five or six times a day; washed with real
soap, an improvement on sand. Half a dozen rebel doctors prowling
around, occasionally one that needs dressing down, but as a general
thing are very kind. Can see from my bunk a large live oak tree
which is a curiosity to me. Although it is hot weather the evenings
are cool, in fact cold; ocean breezes. A discussion on the subject
has set me down as weighing about ninety-five; I think about one
hundred and five or ten pounds; weighed when captured one hundred and
seventy-eight; boarding with the confederacy does not agree with me.
The swelling about my body has all left me. Sergt. Winn belongs to
the 100th Ohio; he has charge of a ward in this hospital.

Sept. 27.—Getting so I can eat a little and like the gruel. Have
prided myself all during the imprisonment on keeping a stiff upper
lip while I saw big strong men crying like children; cruelty and
privations would never make me cry—always so mad, but now it is
different and weaken a little sometimes all to myself. Land, my sick
comrade, writes at my dictation.

Sept 28.—Sent word to Battese by a convalescent who is being sent to
the large prison, that I am getting well. Would like to see him. Am
feeling better. Good many union men in Savannah. Three hundred sick
here, with all kinds of diseases—gangrene, dropsy, scurvy, typhoid
and other fevers, diarrhea, &c. Good care taken of me. Have medicine
often, and gruel. Land does the writing.

Sept. 29.—Yes, I am better, but poor and weak. Feeling hungry more
now, and can take nourishment quite often. Mike Hoare calls to see
me. He is thinking of escape. Should think a person might escape from
here when able. I shall get well now. Sweet potatoes for sale. Like
to see such things, but cannot eat them. Rebel officer put his hand
on my head a few minutes ago and said something; don’t know what. It
is said the Yankees can throw shell into Savannah from their gunboats
down the river. Sergeant Winn comes to see me and cheers me up. Winn
is a sutler as well as nurse, that is, he buys eatables from the
guards and other rebels, and sells to our men. Number of marines and
sailors in the building adjoining our hospital; also some Yankee
officers sick. Winn makes quite a little money. They have soap here
to wash with. The encouraging talk of ending the war soon helps me to
get well.

Sept. 30.—Am decidedly better and getting quite an appetite but
can get nothing but broth, gruel, &c. Mouth very bad. Two or three
teeth have come out, and can’t eat any hard food any way. They give
me quinine, at least I think it is quinine. Good many visitors come
here to see the sick, and they look like union people. Savannah
is a fine place from all accounts of it. Mike is getting entirely
over his troubles and talks continually of getting away, there are
a great many Irish about here, and they are principally union men.
Mike wishes I was able to go with him. Nurses are mostly marines
who have been sick and are convalescent. As a class they are good
fellows, but some are rough ones. Are very profane. The cords in my
legs loosening up a little. Whiskey and water given me to-day, also
weakened vinegar and salt. Am all the time getting better. LATER—My
faithful friend came to see me to-day. Was awful glad to see him. He
is well. A guard came with him. Battese is quite a curiosity among
the Savannah rebels. Is a very large, broad shouldered Indian, rather
ignorant, but full of common sense and very kind hearted. Is allowed
many favors.

Oct. 1.—A prisoner of war nearly a year. Have stood and went
through the very worst kind of treatment. Am getting ravenously
hungry, but they won’t give me much to eat. Even Mike won’t give me
anything. Says the doctors forbid it. Well, I suppose it is so. One
trouble with the men here who are sick, they are too indolent and
discouraged, which counteracts the effect of medicines. A dozen or
twenty die in the twenty-four hours. Have probably half tablespoonful
of whiskey daily, and it is enough. Land is a good fellow. (I
wrote this last sentence myself, and Land says he will scratch it
out.—Ransom). A high garden wall surrounds us. Wall is made of stone.
Mike dug around the corners of the walls, and in out-of-the-way
places, and got together a mess of greens out of pusley. Offered
me some and then wouldn’t let me have it. Meaner than pusley. Have
threatened to lick the whole crowd in a week.

Oct. 2.—Coming cool weather and it braces me right up. Sailors are
going away to be exchanged. Ate some sweet potato to-day, and it
beats everything how I am gaining. Drink lots of gruel, and the
more I drink the more I want. Have vinegar and salt and water mixed
together given me, also whiskey, and every little while I am taking
something, either food or medicine, and the more I take the more
I want. Am just crazy for anything, no matter what. Could eat a
mule’s ear. Eat rice and vegetable soup. All the talk that I hear is
to the effect that the war is most over. Don’t want to be disturbed
at all until I am well, which will not be very long now. All say
if I don’t eat too much will soon be well. Mike lives high. Is an
ingenious fellow and contrives to get many good things to eat. Gives
me anything that he thinks won’t hurt me. Setting up in my bunk.
Have washed all over and feel fifty per cent. better. Just a jumping
toward convalescence.

Oct 3.—The hospital is crowded now with sick; about thirty die now
each day. Men who walked away from Andersonville, and come to get
treatment, are too far gone to rally, and die. Heard Jeff. Davis’
speech read to-day. He spoke of an exchange soon. I am better where
I am for a few weeks yet. Number of sailors went to-day. Gnaw onion,
raw sweet potato. Battese here, will stay all day and go back
to-night. Says he is going with marines to be exchanged. Give him
food, which he is loth to eat although hungry. Says he will come to
see me after I get home to Michigan.

Oct. 4.—Am now living splendid; vegetable diet is driving off the
scurvy and dropsy, in fact the dropsy has dropped out but the effect
remains. Set up now part of the time and talk like a runaway horse
until tired out and then collapse. Heard that all the prisoners are
going to be sent to Millen, Ga. Wrote a few lines directed to my
father in Michigan. Am now given more food but not much at a time.
Two poor fellows in our tent do not get along as well as I do,
although Land is doing well and is going to be a nurse. The hospital
is not guarded very close and Mike Hoare cannot resist the temptation
to escape. Well, joy go with him. Dosed with quinine and beastly to
take. Battese on his last visit to me left the two first books of my
diary which he had in his possession. There is no doubt but he has
saved my life, although he will take no credit for it. It is said
all were moved from Andersonville to different points; ten thousand
went to Florence, ten thousand to Charleston and ten thousand to
Savannah; but the dead stay there and will for all time to come. What
a terrible place and what a narrow escape I had of it. Seems to me
that fifteen thousand died while I was there; an army almost and as
many men as inhabit a city of fifty thousand population.

Oct. 5.—All in Andersonville will remember Daly, who used to drive
the bread wagon into that place. He came to Savannah with us and was
in this hospital; a few days ago he went away with some sailors to
be exchanged. Soon after leaving Savannah he fell off the cars and
was killed, and a few hours after leaving here was brought back and
buried; it is said he had been drinking. Getting better every day,
eat right smart. Mike waiting for a favorable chance to escape and in
the meantime is getting well; heard that Battese has gone away with
sailors to our lines. Its wonderful the noticeable change of air here
from that at Andersonville—wonder that any lived a month inhaling the
poison. If some of those good fellows that died there, Jimmy Devers,
Dr. Lewis, Swain, McGuire and scores of others, had lived through it
to go home with me, should feel better. Have a disagreeable task to
perform—that of going to see the relatives of fifteen or twenty who
died and deliver messages. Rebel surgeons act as if the war was most
over, and not like very bad enemies. Fresh beef issued to those able
to eat it which is not me; can chew nothing hard, in fact cannot chew
at all. Am all tired out and will stop for to-day.

Oct. 7.—Havn’t time to write much; busy eating. Mouth getting better,
cords in my legs loosening up. Battese has not gone; was here to-day
and got a square meal. Don’t much think that I have heretofore
mentioned the fact that I have two small gold rings, which has been
treasured carefully all during my imprisonment. They were presents
to me before leaving home; it is needless to say they were from lady
friends. Have worn them part of the time and part of the time they
have been secreted about my clothes. Yankee rings are in great demand
by the guards; crave delicacies and vegetables so much that think I
may be pardoned for letting them go now, and as Mike says he can get
a bushel of sweet potatoes for them, have told him to make the trade,
and he says will do it. Sweet potatoes sliced up and put in a dish
and cooked with a piece of beef and seasoned, make a delicious soup.
There are grayback lice in the hospital, just enough for company’s
sake—should feel lonesome without them. Great many visitors come
to look at us and from my bunk can see them come through the gate;
yankees are a curiosity in this southern port, as none were ever kept
here before; I hear that the citizens donate bread and food to the
prisoners.

Oct. 8.—Talk of Millen, about ninety miles from here. Mike will
trade off the rings to-night. Owe Sergt. Winn $12 for onions and
sweet potatoes, confederate money however; a dollar confed. is only
ten cents in money. Hub Dakin, from Dansville, Mich., is in this
hospital. It is said Savannah will be in our hands in less than
two months. Some Irish citizens told Mike so. Union army victorious
everywhere. Going on twelve months a prisoner of war. Don’t want
to be exchanged now; could not stand the journey home; just want
to be let alone one month and then home and friends. Saw myself in
a looking glass for the first time in ten months and am the worst
looking specimen—don’t want to go home in twelve years unless I look
different from this; almost inclined to disown myself. Pitch pine
smoke is getting peeled off; need skinning. Eye sight improving with
other troubles. Can’t begin to read a newspaper and with difficulty
write a little at a time. Can hear big guns every morning from down
the river; it is said to be yankee gunboats bidding the city of
Savannah “good morning.”

Oct. 9.—The reason we have not been exchanged is because if the
exchange is made it will put all the men held by the union forces
right into the rebel army, while the union prisoners of war held by
the rebels are in no condition to do service; that would seem to me
to be a very poor reason. Rowe and Bullock are in the main prison
I hear, and well; it is one of the miracles that Bullock lived as
he was ailing all through Andersonville. Brass buttons with hens on
(eagles) are eagerly sought after by the guards. Mike still harping
on escape, but I attend right to the business of getting enough to
eat. Although can’t eat much have the appetite all the same. The
rebel M. D., by name Pendleton, or some such name, says if I am not
careful will have a relapse, and is rather inclined to scold; says
I get along all together too fast, and tells the nurse and Mike and
Land, that I must not eat but little at a time and then only such
food as he may direct, and if I don’t do as he says, will put me in
the main building away from my friends. Says it is suicide the way
some act after a long imprisonment. Well, suppose he is right and I
must go slow. Names of yankee officers marked on the tents that have
occupied them as prisoner of war before us.

Oct. 10.—Mike traded off the gold rings for three pecks of sweet
potatoes and half a dozen onions; am in clover. Make nice soup out of
beef, potatoe, bread, onion and salt; can trade a sweet potatoe for
most anything. Mike does the cooking and I do the eating; he won’t
eat my potatoes, some others do though and without my permission.
’Tis ever thus, wealth brings care and trouble. Battese came to-day
to see me and gave him some sweet potatoes. He is going away soon
the rebels having promised to send him with next batch of sailors;
is a favorite with rebels. Mike baking bread to take with him in his
flight. Set now at the door of the tent on a soap box; beautiful
shade trees all over the place. Am in the 5th Ward, tent No. 12;
coverlid still does me good service. Many die here but not from lack
of attention or medicine. They haven’t the vitality to rally after
their sufferings at Andersonville. Sisters of Charity go from tent
to tent looking after men of their own religion; also citizens come
among us. Wheat bread we have quite often and is donated by citizens.
Guards walk on the outside of the wall and only half a dozen or so on
the inside, two being at the gate; not necessary to guard the sick
very close. Should judge the place was some fine private residence
before being transformed into the Marine Hospital. Have good water.
What little hair I have is coming off; probably go home bald-headed.

Oct. 12.—Still getting better fast, and doctor says too fast. Now
do nearly all the diary writing. Hardly seems possible that our
own Yankee gunboats are so near us, so near that we can hear them
fire off their guns, but such is the case. Reports have it that the
Johnny Rebels are about worsted. Has been a hard war and cruel one.
Mike does all my cooking now, although an invalid. He trades a sweet
potato for vinegar, which tastes the best of anything, also have
other things suitable for the sick, and this morning had an egg. My
gold rings will put me in good health again. All the time medicine,
that is, three or four times a day; and sores on my body are healing
up now for the first time. Mouth, which was one mass of black bloody
swellings on the inside, is now white and inflamation gone, teeth
however, loose, and have lost four through scurvy, having come out
themselves. My eyes, which had been trying to get in out of sight,
are now coming out again and look more respectable. Battese was taken
prisoner with eighteen other Indians; they all died but one beside
himself.

Oct. 14.—Did not write any yesterday. A man named Hinton died in
our tent at about two o’clock this morning, and his bunk is already
filled by another sick man. None die through neglect here; all
is done that could reasonably be expected. The pants with those
buttons on to be taken North for a little boy whose father died
in Andersonville, were taken away from me when first taken to the
hospital. Have also lost nearly all the relics, pictures and letters
given me to take North. For a week or ten days could take care of
nothing. Winn took charge of the book that I am writing in now and
Battese had the other two books, and now they are all together safe
in my charge. Wonder if any one will ever have the patience or time
to read it all? Not less than a thousand pages of finely written crow
tracks, and some places blurred and unintelligable from being wet
and damp. As I set up in my bunk my legs are just fitted for hanging
down over the side, and have not been straightened for three or four
months. Rub the cords with an ointment furnished me by physician and
can see a change for the better. Legs are blue, red and shiny and in
some places the skin seems calloused to the bone.

Oct. 15.—Richard is getting to be himself again. A very little
satisfies me as regards the upward tendency to health and liberty.
Some would think to look at me almost helpless and a prisoner of war,
that I hadn’t much to feel glad about. Well, let them go through what
I have and then see. Citizens look on me with pity when I should be
congratulated. Am probably the happiest mortal any where hereabouts.
Shall appreciate life, health and enough to eat hereafter. Am anxious
for only one thing, and that is to get news home to Michigan of my
safety. Have no doubt but I am given up for dead, as I heard I was
so reported. Drizzling rain has set in. Birds chipper from among the
trees. Hear bells ring about the city of Savannah. Very different
from the city of Richmond; there it was all noise and bustle and
clatter, every man for himself and the devil take the hindmost, while
here it is quiet and pleasant and nice. Every one talks and treats
you with courtesy and kindness. Don’t seem as if they could both be
cities of the Confederacy. Savannah has probably seen as little of
real war or the consequence of war, as any city in the South.

Oct. 18.—Every day since last writing I have continued to improve,
and no end to my appetite. Now walk a trifle with the aid of
crutches. Coming cool, and agrees with me, have fresh beef issued
to us. Mike not yet gone. Battese went some days ago with others to
our lines, at least it was supposed to our lines. Hope to see him
sometime. Many have gangrene. Millen still talked of. See city papers
every day, and they have a discouraged tone as if their cause were on
its last legs. Mike goes to-night for sure, he says. Think if I was
in his place would not try to get away, we are so comfortable here.
Still liberty is everything, and none know what it is except those
deprived of it. It’s a duty, we think, to escape if possible, and it
seems possible to get away from here. Rebel guards that I sometimes
come in contact with are marines who belong to rebel gunboats
stationed in the mouth of Savannah River and are on duty here for a
change from boat life. They seem a kindly set, and I don’t believe
they would shoot a prisoner if they saw him trying to get away.

Oct. 19.—Last night I talked with a guard while Mike Hoare went
out of his tunnel and got away safely from the hospital. The guard
was on the inside and I hobbled to where he was and engaged him in
conversation and Mike crawled away. It seems that Mike learned of
some union Irish citizens in the city and his idea is to reach them
which he may do, as there are scarcely any troops about the city, all
being to the front. Now I am alone, best friends all gone one way or
the other. The only acquaintances here now are Land and Sergt. Winn,
with whom I became acquainted in Andersonville. Not like my other
friends though. It is said there are half a dozen hospitals similar
to this in Savannah which are filled with Andersonville wrecks. They
have need to do something to redeem themselves from past conduct.
Don’t believe that it is the Confederacy that is taking such good
care of us, but it is the city of Savannah; that is about the way it
is as near as I can find out.

Oct. 22.—Lieut. Davis commands the prison in Savannah. Is the same
individual who officiated at Andersonville during Wirtz’s sickness
last summer. He is a rough but not a bad man. Probably does as well
as he can. Papers state that they will commence to move the prisoners
soon to Millen, to a Stockade similar to the one at Andersonville. I
am hobbling about the hospital with the help of two crutches. Have
not heard a word from old Mike, or Battese or any one that ever
heard of before, for some days. Sweet potatoes building me up with
the luxuries they are traded for. Had some rice in my soup. Terrible
appetite, but for all that don’t eat a great deal. Have three sticks
propped up at the mouth of our tent, with a little fire under it,
cooking food. Men in tent swear because smoke goes inside. Make it
all straight by giving them some soup. Rebel surgeons all smoke, at
least do while among us. Have seen prisoners who craved tobacco more
than food, and said of the two would prefer tobacco. I never have
used tobacco in any form.

Oct. 24.—Did not write yesterday. Jumping right along toward health
if not wealth. Discarded crutches and have now two canes. Get around
considerable, a little at a time. It is said that they want Yankee
printers who are prisoners of war to go and work in the printing
offices in the city on parole of honor(?). Will not do it. Am all
right where I am for a month yet, and by that time expect to go to
our lines. Hub Dakin in hospital now. Priests still come and go.
Convalescent shot and wounded by the guards, the first I have heard
of being hurt since I came to this place. A small-pox case discovered
in hospital and created great excitement. Was removed. Was loitering
near the gate, when an Irish woman came through it with her arms full
of wheat bread. All those able to rushed up to get some of it and
forty hands were pleading for her favors. After picking her men and
giving away half a dozen loaves her eyes lighted on me and I secured
a large loaf. She was a jolly, good natured woman, and it is said
that she keeps a bake shop. My bad looks stood me in well this time.
As beautiful bread as I ever saw.

Oct. 25.—Am feeling splendid and legs doing nobly, and even taking on
fat. Am to be a gallant nurse as soon as able, so Sergt. Winn says.
Most of the men as soon as convalescent are sent to big prison, but
Winn has spoken a good word for me. Papers say the prison at Millen,
Ga., is about ready for occupancy, and soon all will be sent there,
sick and all. Nights cool and need more covering than we have. I am
congratulated occasionally by prisoners who saw me in Andersonville.
They wonder at my being alive. Rains.

Oct. 26.—Time passes now fast; most a year since captured. When the
Rebs once get hold of a fellow they hang on for dear life. Talk that
all are to be vaccinated any way, whether they want to or not. Don’t
suppose it will do any harm if good matter is used. Vaccinate me if
they want to. Walk better every day. Sometimes I overdo a little and
feel bad in consequence. Land is “right smart,” in fact, so smart
that he will have to go to the big stockade pretty soon.

Oct. 27.—A rebel physician (not a regular one), told me that it
looked very dark for the Confederacy just now; that we need have no
fears but we would get home very soon now, which is grand good news.
I have no fears now but all will turn out well. Everything points to
a not far away ending of the war, and all will rejoice, rebels and
all.

Oct. 28.—Am feeling splendid, and legs most straight. Getting fat
fast. Am to be a nurse soon. Reported that they are moving prisoners
to Millen. Over a thousand went yesterday. About ten thousand of
the Andersonville prisoners came to Savannah, ten thousand went to
Florence and ten to Charleston, S. C. Only the sick were left behind
there, and it is said they died like sheep after the well ones went
away. Great excitement among the Gray-coats. Some bad army news for
them, I reckon. Negroes at work fortifying about the city.

Oct. 29.—I suppose we must be moved again, from all reports. Savannah
is threatened by Union troops, and we are to be sent to Millen, Ga.
Am sorry, for while I remain a prisoner would like to stay here,
am getting along so nicely and recovering my health. It is said,
however, that Millen is a good place to go to, and we will have to
take the consequences whatever they may be. Can eat now anything I
can get hold of, provided it can be cooked up and made into the shape
of soup. Mouth will not admit of hard food. This hospital is not far
from the Savannah jail, and when the gate is open we can see it. It
is said that some one was hung there not long ago. Papers referred to
it and I asked a guard and he nodded “Yes.” Have seen one “hanging
bee,” and never want to see another one. Last of my three pecks of
sweet potatoes almost gone. For a dollar, Confed., bought two quarts
of guber peas (pea-nuts), and now I have got them can’t eat them.
Sell them for a dollar per quart—two dollars for the lot. It is thus
that the Yankee getteth wealth. Have loaned one cane to another
convalescent and go around with the aid of one only. Every day a
marked improvement. Ain’t so tall as I “used to was.” Some ladies
visited the hospital to-day to see live Yankees, who crowded around.
They were as much of a curiosity to us as we were to them.

Oct. 30.—It is said prisoners from main prison are being removed
every day, and the sick will go last. Quite a batch of the nearest
well ones were sent from here to-day to go with the others. Am to
be a nurse pretty soon. Don’t think I could nurse a sick cat, still
it’s policy to be one. Winn tells me that he has made money dickering
at trade with the rebels and prisoners. He has trusted me to twelve
dollars worth of things and says he don’t expect or want pay. The
twelve dollars amounts to only one dollar and twenty cents in our
money. The surgeon who has had charge of us has been sent away to
the front. It seems he had been wounded in battle and was doing home
duty until able to again go to his command. Shall always remember
him for his kind and skillful treatment. Came round and bid us all
good bye, and sick sorry to lose him. Are now in charge of a hospital
steward, who does very well. The atmosphere here makes gentlemen of
everybody. Papers say that the city must be fortified, and it is
being done. Considerable activity about the place. Trains run through
at all hours of the night, evidently shifting their troops to other
localities. LATER—Since the surgeon went away the rebels are drinking
up our whiskey, and to-night are having a sort of carnival, with some
of the favorite nurses joining in; singing songs, telling stories,
and a good time generally. They are welcome to my share.

Oct. 31.—Reported that the well prisoners have all left this city
for Millen and we go to-night or to-morrow. I am duly installed as
nurse, and walk with only one cane. Legs still slightly drawn up. Hub
Dakin, Land and myself now mess together. Am feeling very well. Will
describe my appearance. Will interest me to read in after years, if
no one else. Am writing this diary to please myself, now. I weigh one
hundred and seventeen pounds, am dressed in rebel jacket, blue pants
with one leg torn off and fringed about half way between my knee and
good sized foot, the same old pair of miss matched shoes I wore in
Andersonville, very good pair of stockings, a “biled” white shirt,
and a hat which is a compromise between a clown’s and the rebel white
partially stiff hat; am poor as a tad-pole, in fact look just about
like an East Tennesseean, of the poor white trash order. You might
say that I am an “honery looking cuss” and not be far out of the way.
My cheeks are sunken, eyes sunken, sores and blotches both outside
and inside my mouth, and my right leg the whole length of it, red,
black and blue and tender of touch. My eyes, too, are very weak,
and in a bright sun I have to draw the slouch hat away down over
them. Bad as this picture is, I am a beauty and picture of health in
comparison to my appearance two months ago. When taken prisoner was
fleshy, weighing about one hundred and seventy or seventy-five, round
faced, in fact an overgrown, ordinary, green looking chap of twenty.
Had never endured any hardships at all and was a spring chicken. As
has been proven however, I had an iron constitution that has carried
me through and above all a disposition to make the best of everything
no matter how bad, and considerable will power with the rest. When I
think of the thousands and thousands of thorough-bred soldiers, tough
and hearty and capable of marching thirty, forty, and even fifty
miles in twenty-four hours and think nothing of it, I wonder and keep
wondering that it can be so, that I am alive and gaining rapidly in
health and strength. Believe now that no matter where we are moved
to, I shall continue to improve, and get well. Succumbed only at the
last in Andersonville, when no one could possibly keep well. With
this general inventory of myself and the remark that I haven’t a red
cent, or even a Confederate shin-plaster, will put up my diary and
get ready to go where ever they see fit to send us, as orders have
come to get ready. LATER—We are on the Georgia Central Railroad,
en-route for Millen, Ga., which is ninety miles from Savannah, and I
believe north. Are in box cars and very crowded with sick prisoners.
Two nurses, myself being one of them, have charge of about a hundred
sick. There are, however, over six hundred on the train.

[Illustration: (decorative separator)]




REMOVED TO MILLEN.

  ANOTHER CHANGE AND NOT A BAD ONE—ALMOST A HOSTAGE OF WAR—ELECTION
  DAY AND A VOTE FOR LITTLE MAC—ONE YEAR A PRISONER OF WAR, ETC., ETC.


CAMP LAWTON, Millen, Ga., Nov. 1.—Arrived at our destination not far
from midnight, and it was a tedious journey. Two died in the car I
was in. Were taken from the cars to this prison in what they call
ambulances, but what I call lumber wagons. Are now congregated in the
south-east corner of the stockade under hastily put up tents. This
morning we have drawn rations, both the sick and the well, which are
good and enough. The stockade is similar to that at Andersonville,
but in a more settled country, the ground high and grassy, and
through the prison runs a stream of good pure water, with no swamp at
all. It is apparently a pleasant and healthy location. A portion of
the prison is timber land, and the timber has been cut down and lays
where it fell, and the men who arrived before us have been busily at
work making shanties and places to sleep in. There are about six
thousand prisoners here, and I should judge there was room for twelve
or fifteen thousand. Men say they are given food twice each day,
which consists of meal and fresh beef in rather small quantities,
but good and wholesome. The rebel officer in command is a sociable
and kindly disposed man, and the guards are not strict, that is, not
cruelly so. We are told that our stay here will be short. A number
of our men have been detailed to cook the food for the sick, and
their well being is looked to by the rebel surgeon as well as our own
men. The same surgeon who for the last ten days had charge of us in
Savannah has charge of us now. He does not know over and above much
but on the whole does very well. Barrels of molasses (nigger toe)
have been rolled inside and it is being issued to the men, about
one-fourth of a pint to each man, possibly a little more. Some of the
men, luxuriantly, put their allowances together and make molasses
candy of it. One serious drawback is the scarcity of dishes, and one
man I saw draw his portion in his two hands, which held it until his
comrade could find a receptacle for it.

Nov. 2.—Have seen many of my old comrades of Andersonville, among
whom is my tried friend Sergt. Wm. B. Rowe; were heartily glad to
see one another; also little Bullock who has improved wonderfully in
appearance. Everyone is pleased with this place and are cheerful,
hoping and expecting to be released before many weeks; they all
report as having been well treated in Savannah and have pleasant
recollections of that place; from what could be seen of the city by
us prisoners it seems the handsomest one in America. Should judge
it was a very wealthy place. My duties as nurse are hard, often too
much so for my strength, yet the enforced exercise does me good and
continue to improve all the time. A cane will be necessary to my
locomotion for a long time as am afraid myself permanently injured;
my cane is not a gold headed one; it is a round picket which has been
pulled off some fence. Very cheering accounts of the war doings. All
who want to can take the oath of allegiance to the confederacy and
be released; am happy to say though that out of all here, but two or
three has done so, and they are men who are a detriment to any army.
The weather now is beautiful, air refreshing, water ditto; all happy
and contented and await coming events with interest. Part of the
brook, the lower part, is planked and sides boarded up for sanitary
privileges; water has also been dammed up and a fall made which
carries off the filth with force. Plenty of wood to do cooking with
and the men putter around with their cooking utensils such as they
have. Sort of prize fight going on now.

Nov. 3.—About a hundred convalescents were taken outside to-day to
be sent away to our lines the officials told us. At a later hour the
commander came inside and said he wanted twelve men to fall into
line and they did so, myself being one of the twelve; he proceeded
to glance us over and on looking at me said: “Step back out of
the ranks, I want only able-bodied men.” I stepped down and out
considerably chagrinned, as the general impression was that they were
to go to our lines with the convalescents who had been taken outside
before. He marched off the twelve men and it then leaked out that
they were to be sent to some prison to be held as hostages until the
end of the war. Then I felt better. It is said all the sick will be
taken outside as soon as they get quarters fixed up to accommodate
them. Think that I shall resign my position as nurse. Would rather
stay with the “boys.” Land is no longer with the sick but has been
turned into the rank and file, also Dakin. Dakin, Rowe and Land are
all together, and if the sick are taken outside I shall join my old
comrades and mess with them. But few die now; quite a number died
from the removal, but now all seem to be on the mend. I am called,
contrary to my expectations, a good nurse; certainly have pity for
the poor unfortunates, but lack the strength to take care of them. It
needs good strong men to act as nurses.

Nov. 4.—The fine weather still continues. Just warm enough, and
favorable for prisoners. Food now we get but once a day—not all we
want, but three times as much as issued at Andersonville and of good
quality. The officer in command, as I have said before, is a kind
hearted man, and on his appearance inside he was besieged by hundreds
of applications for favors and for the privilege of going outside
on parole of honor. He began granting such favors as he could, but
has been besieged too much and now stays outside. Has, however, put
up a letter box on the inside so that letters will reach him, and
every day it is filled half full. Occasionally he takes to a letter
and sends inside for the writer of it, and that one answered is the
occasion of a fresh batch, until it is said that the poor man is
harrassed about as much as the President of the United States is for
fat offices. As I have before remarked in my diary, the Yankee is a
queer animal.

Nov. 5.—Hostages taken out. Everything is bright and pleasant and I
see no cause to complain, therefore won’t. To-morrow is election day
at the North; wish I was there to vote—which I ain’t. Will here say
that I am a War Democrat to the backbone. Not a very stiff one, as my
backbone is weak.

Nov. 6.—One year ago to-day captured. Presidential election at the
North between Lincoln and McClellan. Some one fastened up a box,
and all requested to vote, for the fun of the thing. Old prisoners
haven’t life enough to go and vote; new prisoners vote for present
administration. I voted for McClellan with a hurrah, and another
hurrah, and still another. Had this election occurred while we were
at Andersonville, four-fifths would have voted for McClellan. We
think ourselves shamefully treated in being left so long as prisoners
of war. Abe Lincoln is a good man and a good president, but he is
controlled by others who rule the exchange business as well as most
other things. Of course our likes and dislikes make no difference to
him or any one else. Yes, one year ago to-day captured. A year is a
good while, even when pleasantly situated, but how much longer being
imprisoned as we have been. It seems a lifetime, and I am twenty
years older than a year ago. Little thought that I was to remain
all this time in durance vile. Improving in health, disposition and
everything else. If both breeches legs were of the same length should
be supremely happy. Should make a bon-fire to-night if I wasn’t
afraid of celebrating a defeat. Had lots of fun hurrahing for “Little
Mac.”

Nov. 7.—A rather cold rain wets all who have not shelter. Many ladies
come to see us; don’t come through the gate, but look at us through
that loophole. Any one with money can buy extras in the way of food,
but, alas, we have no money. Am now quite a trader—that is, I make
up a very thin dish of soup and sell it for ten cents, or trade it
for something. Am ravenously hungry now and can’t get enough to eat.
The disease has left my system, the body demands food, and I have to
exert my speculative genius to get it, am quite a hand at such things
and well calculated to take care of myself. A man belonging to the
Masonic order need not stay here an hour. It seems as if every rebel
officer was of that craft, and a prisoner has but to make himself
known to be taken care of. Pretty strong secret association that will
stand the fortunes of war. That is another thing I must do when I get
home—join the Masons. No end of things for me to do: visit all the
foreign countries that prisoners told me about, and not forgetting to
take in Boston by the way, wear silk under clothing, join the masons,
and above all educate myself to keep out of rebel prisons. A person
has plenty of time to think here, more so than in Andersonville;
there it was business to keep alive. Small alligator killed at lower
part of the stream.

Nov. 8.—All eager for news. Seems as if we were on the eve of
something. So quiet here that it must predict a storm. Once in a
while some pesky rebel takes it upon himself to tell us a lot of lies
to the effect that our armies are getting beaten; that England joins
the Confederacy to whip out the North; that there is no prospect of
ending the war; that we are not going to be exchanged at all, but
remain prisoners, etc., etc. If he is a good talker and tells his
story well it makes us all blue and down-hearted. Then, pretty soon,
we are told more joyful news which we are ready to believe, and
again take heart and think of the good times coming. Would like to
hear the election news. Wonder who is elected? Feel stronger every
day, and have a little flesh on my bones. As the weather gets cool,
we are made painfully aware of the fact that we are sadly deficient
in clothing. Will freeze if compelled to stay through the winter.
Coverlid still does duty although disabled by past experience, same
as all of us. We talk over the many good traits of Battese and others
who are separated from us by death and otherwise. The exploits of
Hendryx we will never tire of narrating. What a meeting when we
can get together in future years, and talk over the days we have
lived and suffered together. Exchange rumors fill the air. One good
sign—the rebels are making no more improvements about this prison;
they say we are not to stay here long. We hear that our troops are
marching all through the South. Guess that is the reason why they
think of moving us all the time. All right, Johnny Rebels, hope we
are an elephant on your hands. Jeff Davis denounced by the papers,
which is a good sign. Occasionally get one in camp, and read it all
up. No library here. Not a scrap of anything to read; principal
occupation looking for stray news.

Nov. 9.—This diary would seem to treat of two things principally,
that of food and exchange. Try to write of something else, but my
thoughts invariably turn to these two subjects. Prisoners of war will
know how to excuse me for thus writing. A dead line has also been
fixed up in Camp Lawton, but thus far no one has been shot. Rebel
doctors inside examining men who may be troubled with disease prison
life might aggravate. Those selected are taken outside and either put
in hospitals or sent to our lines. Yankee ingenuity is brought into
play to magnify diseases, and very often a thoroughly well man will
make believe that he is going to die in less than a week unless taken
away. Have laughed for an hour at the way a fellow by the name of
Sawyer fooled them. The _modus operandi_ will hardly bear writing in
these pages, but will do to tell. Have made a raise of another pair
of pants with both legs of the same length, and I discard the old
ones to a “poor” prisoner. An advantage in the new pair is that there
is plenty of room, too, from being three or four sizes too large, and
the legs as long as the others were short. My one suspender has a
partner now, and all runs smoothly. Although Bullock is fleshing up
and getting better in health, he is a wreck and always will be. Seems
to be a complete change in both body and mind. He was a favorite in
our regiment, well known and well liked. Rowe is the same stiff,
stern patrican as of old, calmly awaiting the next turn in the wheel
of fortune.

Nov. 10.—Pleasant and rather cool. My hair is playing me pranks.
It grows straight up in the air and only on the topmost part of my
head. Where a man is generally bald, it’s right the other way with
me. If there is anything else that can happen to make me any more
ridiculous, now is the time for it to appear. About all I lack now
is to have an eye gouged out. A friend says that the reason my hair
grows the way it does is because I have been scared so much, and
it has stuck up straight so much, that it naturally has a tendency
that way. Perhaps that is it. If I thought we were to stay here for
any length of time would open up a hair cutting shop; but should
hate to get nicely started in business and a trade worked up, then
have an exchange come along and knock the whole thing in the head.
We are not far from the railroad track, and can listen to the cars
going by. Very often Confederate troops occupy them and they give
the old familiar rebel yell. Once in a while the Yanks get up steam
enough to give a good hurrah back to them. Seems to be a good deal of
transferring troops now in the South. I watch all the movements of
the rebels and can draw conclusions, and am of the opinion that Mr.
Confederacy is about whipped and will soon surrender. It certainly
looks that way to me. Rumors that we are to be moved.

Nov. 11.—Very well fed. There it goes again. Had determined not to
say anything more about how we were fed, and now I have done it.
However, I was not grumbling about it any way. Will merely add that
I have an appetite larger than an elephant. Will also say that there
are rumors of exchange, for a change—a subject that has been spoken
of before. Cannot possibly refrain from saying that I am feeling
splendidly and worth a hundred dead men yet. Have two dollars in
Confederate money and if I can sell this half canteen of dish-water
soup shall have another dollar before dark. “Who takes it? Ah, here
ye are! Sold again; business closed for to-night, gentlemen. Early in
the morning shall have a fresh supply of this delicious soup, with
real grease floating on top.” Shutters put up and we settle down for
the night without depositing in the bank. Shan’t go to sleep until
ten or eleven o’clock, but lay and think, and build those air castles
that always fall with a crash and bury us in the debris. Often
hear the baying of hounds from a distance, through the night—and
such strange sounds to the Northern ear. Good night. In rather a
sentimental mood. Wonder if she is married?

Nov. 12.—Everything quiet and running smoothly. Waiting for
something. Have just heard the election news—Mr. Lincoln again
elected, and “Little Mac” nowhere. Just about as I expected. Returns
were rather slow in coming in, evidently waiting for the Camp Lawton
vote. Well, did what I could for George; hurrahed until my throat
was sore and stayed so for a week; know that I influenced twenty
or thirty votes, and now can get no office because the political
opponent was elected. ’Tis ever thus. Believe I would make a good
postmaster for this place. There is none here and should have
applied immediately, if my candidate had been elected. More sick
taken away on the cars; rebels say to be exchanged. Appears to be
a sort of mystery of late, and can’t make head nor tail of their
movements. Would not be surprised at any hour to receive news to get
ready for our lines. Don’t know that I have felt so before since my
imprisonment. Have lived rather high to-day on capital made yesterday
and early this morning. Just my way—make a fortune and then spend it.

Nov. 13.—To-day had an incident happen to me; hardly an incident,
but a sort of an adventure. When I was nurse on one or two occasions
I helped the hospital steward make out his report to his superiors,
and in that way got a sort of reputation for knowing how to do these
things a little better than the ordinary run of people, and rebels in
particular. A rebel sergeant came inside at just about nine o’clock
this morning and looked me up and said I was wanted outside, and so
went. Was taken to a house not far from the stockade, which proved
to be the officers head-quarters. There introduced to three or four
officers, whose names do not occur to me, and informed that they
were in need of some one to do writing and assist in making out
their army papers, and if I would undertake the job, they would see
that I had plenty to eat, and I should be sent North at the first
opportunity. I respectfully, gently and firmly declined the honor,
and after partaking of quite a substantial meal, which they gave me
thinking I would reconsider my decision, was escorted back inside.
Many thought me very foolish for not taking up with the offer. My
reasons for not doing so are these: I would be clearly working for
the Confederacy; can see no real difference in it from actually
entering their army. If I occupied that position it would relieve
some rebel of that duty, and he could stay in the ranks and fight our
men. That is one reason. Another is the fact that instead of their
letting me go to our lines with the first that went, I would be the
very last to go, as they would need me to do duty for them until the
last moment. Was always willing to do extra duty for our own men,
such as issuing clothing on Belle Isle, also my nursing the sick or
in any way doing for them, but when it comes to working in any way
for any rebel, I shall beg to be excused. Might have gone out and
worked in the printing offices in Savannah had I so wished, as they
were short of men all the time, in fact could hardly issue their
papers on account of the scarcity of printers. And so I am still
loyal to the Stars and Stripes and shall have no fears at looking my
friends in the face when I do go home.

Nov. 14.—The kaleidoscope has taken another turn. Six hundred taken
away this forenoon; don’t know where to. As I was about the last
to come to Millen, my turn will not come for some days if only six
hundred are taken out each day. Rebels say they go straight to our
lines, but their being heavily guarded and every possible precaution
taken to prevent their escape, it does not look like our lines to me.
Probably go to Charleston; that seems to be the jumping off place.
Charleston, for some reason or other, seems a bad place to go to. Any
city familiar with the war I want to avoid. Shall hang back as long
as I can, content to let well enough alone. Some of my friends, of
which Bullock is one, flanked out with those going off. What I mean
by “flanked out” is crowding in when it is not their turn and going
with the crowd. Hendryx and I did that when we left Belle Isle, and
we brought up in Andersonville. Will let those do the flanking who
want to, I don’t.

Nov. 15.—At about six or seven o’clock last night six hundred men
were taken away, making in all twelve hundred for the day; another
six hundred are ready to go at a moment’s notice. I don’t know what
to think. Can hardly believe they go to our lines. Seems almost like
a funeral procession to me, as they go through the gate. Rowe and
Hub Dakin talk of going to-day, if any go, having decided to flank.
I have concluded to wait until it is my turn to go. If it is an
exchange there is no danger but all will go, and if not an exchange
would rather be here than any place I know of now. LATER.—Eight
hundred have gone, with Rowe and Dakin in the crowd, and I am here
alone as regards personal friends. Could not be induced to go with
them. Have a sort of presentiment that all is not right. STILL
LATER.—Six hundred more have gone, making 2,600 all together that
have departed, all heavily guarded.

Nov. 16.—A decided thinness in our ranks this morning. Still house
keeping goes right along as usual. Rebels not knowing how to figure
give us just about the same for the whole prison as when all were
here. Had a talk with a rebel sergeant for about an hour. Tried to
find out our destination and could get no satisfaction, although he
said we were going to our lines. Told him I was a mason, odd-fellow,
had every kind of religion (in hopes to strike his), and flattered
him until I was ashamed of myself. In a desultory sort of way he
said he “reckoned we war goin’ nawth.” Well, I will write down the
solution I have at last come to, and we will see how near right I am
after a little. Our troops, Sherman or Kilpatrick or some of them,
are raiding through the South, and we are not safe in Millen, as we
were not safe in Andersonville, and as was plainly evident we were
not safe in Savannah. There is the whole thing in a nutshell, and we
will see. Six hundred gone to-day.

Nov. 17.—It is now said that the prisoners are being moved down on
the coast near Florida. That coincides with my own view, and I think
it very probable. Will try and go about to-morrow. Hardly think I
can go to-day. LATER.—The to-day’s batch are going out of the gate.
Makes me fairly crazy to wait, fearful I am missing it in not going.
This lottery way of living is painful on the nerves. There are all
kinds of rumors. Even have the story afloat that now the raid is
over that drove us away from Andersonville, we are going back there
to stay during the war. That would be a joke. However, I stick to
my resolution that the rebels don’t really know themselves where
we are going. They move us because we are not safe here. They are
bewildered. Believing this am in a comparatively easy state of mind.
Still I worry. Haven’t said a word in a week about my health. Well,
I am convalescing all the time. Still lame, and always expect to be;
can walk very well though, and feeling lively for an old man.

Nov. 18.—None being taken away to-day, I believe on account of
not getting transportation. Notice that rebel troops are passing
through on the railroad and immense activity among them. Am now well
satisfied of the correctness of my views as regards this movement.
Have decided now to stay here until the last. Am getting ready for
action however. Believe we are going to have a warm time of it in
the next few months. Thank fortune I am as well as I am. Can stand
considerable now. Food given us in smaller quantities, and hurriedly
so too. All appears to be in a hurry. Cloudy, and rather wet weather,
and getting decidedly cooler. My noble old coverlid is kept rolled
up and ready to accompany me on my travels at any moment. Have my
lame and stiff leg in training. Walk all over the prison until tired
out so as to strengthen myself. Recruiting officers among us trying
to induce prisoners to enter their army. Say it is no exchange for
during the war, and half a dozen desert and go with them. Even if
we are not exchanged during the war, don’t think we will remain
prisoners long.

Nov. 19.—A car load went at about noon, and are pretty well thinned
out. Over half gone—no one believes to our lines now; all hands
afraid of going to Charleston. Believe I shall try and escape on the
journey, although in no condition to rough it. Am going to engineer
this thing to suit myself and have a little fun. Would like to be
out from under rebel guard once more. When I can look around and
not see a prison wall and a gun ready to shoot me, I shall rejoice.
Have edged up to another comrade and we bunk together. Said comrade
is Corporal Smith, belonging to an Indiana regiment. While he is no
great guns, seems quite a sensible chap and a decided improvement
on many here to mess with. The nights are cool, and a covering of
great benefit. My being the owner of a good blanket makes me a very
desirable comrade to mess with. Two or three together can keep much
warmer than one alone. It is said that a number of outsiders have
escaped and taken to the woods. Another load goes to-night or early
in the morning. My turn will come pretty soon. Nothing new in our
situation or the prospects ahead. Food scarce, but of good quality.
More go and I go to-morrow.

Nov. 20.—None as yet gone to-day and it is already most night. My
turn would not come until to-morrow, and if none go at all to-day
I will probably not get away until about day after to-morrow.
Shan’t flank out, but await my turn and go where fate decrees. Had
a falling out with my companion Smith, and am again alone walking
about the prison with my coverlid on my shoulders. Am determined
that this covering protects none but thoroughly good and square
fellows. LATER.—Going to be a decidedly cold night, and have “made
up” with two fellows to sleep together. The going away is the all
absorbing topic of conversation. Received for rations this day a very
good allowance of hard-tack and bacon. This is the first hard-tack
received since the trip to Andersonville, and is quite a luxury. It
is so hard that I have to tack around and soak mine up before I am
able to eat it. There is a joke to this. Will again go to bed as I
have done the last week, thinking every night would be the last at
Camp Lawton.

Nov. 21.—Got up bright and early, went to the creek and had a good
wash, came back, after a good walk over the prison, and ate my two
large crackers and small piece of bacon left over from yesterday, and
again ready for whatever may turn up. Lost my diminutive cake of soap
in the water and must again take to sand to scrub with, until fortune
again favors me. Men are very restless and reckless, uncertainty
making them so. Try my very best not to have any words or trouble
with them, but occasionally get drawn into it, as I did this morning.
Came out solid however. Is pretty well understood that I can take
care of myself. NOON.—Five hundred getting ready to go; my turn comes
to-morrow, and then we will see what we will see. Decided rumors that
Sherman has taken Atlanta and is marching toward Savannah, the heart
of the Confederacy. All in good spirits for the first time in a week.

[Illustration: (decorative separator)]




ESCAPE BUT NOT ESCAPE.

  MOVED FROM CAMP LAWTON AFTER A SOJOURN OF TWENTY DAYS—DESTINATION
  BLACKSHEAR, GA.—JUMP OFF THE CARS AND OUT FROM REBEL GUARD FOR
  SIX DAYS—A HUNGRY TIME BUT A GOOD ONE—CAPTURED AND MAKE THE
  ACQUAINTANCE OF TWO OTHER RUNAWAYS WITH WHOM I CAST MY FORTUNES,
  ETC., ETC.


Nov. 22.—And now my turn has come, and I get off with the next load
going to-day. My trunk is packed and baggage duly checked; shall try
and get a “lay over” ticket, and rusticate on the road. Will see the
conductor about it. A nice cool day with sun shining brightly—a fit
one for an adventure and I am just the boy to have one. Coverlid
folded up and thrown across my shoulder, lower end tied as only a
soldier knows how. My three large books of written matter on the
inside of my thick rebel jacket, and fastened in. Have a small book
which I keep at hand to write in now. My old hat has been exchanged
for a red zouave cap, and I look like a red headed woodpecker. Leg
behaving beautifully. My latest comrades are James Ready and Bill
Somebody. We have decided to go and keep together on the cars. One of
them has an apology for a blanket, and the two acting in conjunction
keep all three warm nights. LATER.—On the cars, in vicinity of
Savannah en-route for Blackshear, which is pretty well south and not
far from the Florida line. Are very crowded in a close box car and
fearfully warm. Try to get away to-night.

IN THE WOODS NEAR DOCTORTOWN STATION, NO. 5, Ga., Nov. 23.—A change
has come over the spirit of my dreams. During the night the cars ran
very slow, and sometimes stopped for hours on side tracks. A very
long, tedious night, and all suffered a great deal with just about
standing room only. Impossible to get any sleep. Two guards at each
side door, which were open about a foot. Guards were passably decent,
although strict. Managed to get near the door, and during the night
talked considerable with the two guards on the south side of the car.
At about three o’clock this A. M., and after going over a long bridge
which spanned the Altamaha River and in sight of Doctortown, I went
through the open door like a flash and rolled down a high embankment.
Almost broke my neck, but not quite. Guard fired a shot at me, but as
the cars were going, though not very fast, did not hit me. Expected
the cars to stop but they did not, and I had the inexpressible joy of
seeing them move off out of sight. Then crossed the railroad track
going north, went through a large open field and gained the woods,
and am now sitting on the ground leaning up against a big pine tree
_and out from under rebel guard_! The sun is beginning to show itself
in the east and it promises to be a fine day. Hardly know what to
do with myself. If those on the train notified Doctortown people of
my escape they will be after me. Think it was at so early an hour
that they might have gone right through without telling any one
of the jump off. Am happy and hungry and considerably bruised and
scratched up from the escape. The happiness of being here, however,
overbalances everything else. If I had George Hendryx with me now
would have a jolly time, and mean to have as it is. Sun is now up
and it is warmer; birds chippering around, and chipmunks looking
at me with curiosity. Can hear hallooing off a mile or so, which
sounds like farmers calling cattle or hogs or something. All nature
smiles—why should not I?—and I do. Keep my eyes peeled, however, and
look all ways for Sunday. Must work farther back toward what I take
to be a swamp a mile or so away. Am in a rather low country although
apparently a pretty thickly settled one; most too thickly populated
for me, judging from the signs of the times. It’s now about dinner
time, and I have traveled two or three miles from the railroad
track, should judge and am in the edge of a swampy forest, although
the piece of ground on which I have made my bed is dry and nice.
Something to eat wouldn’t be a bad thing. Not over sixty rods from
where I lay is a path evidently travelled more or less by negroes
going from one plantation to another. My hope of food lays by that
road. Am watching for passers by. LATER.—A negro boy too young to
trust has gone by singing and whistling, and carrying a bundle and
a tin pail evidently filled with somebody’s dinner. In as much as I
want to enjoy this out-door Gypsy life, I will not catch and take the
dinner away from him. That would be the height of foolishness. Will
lay for the next one traveling this way. The next one is a dog and
he comes up and looks at me, gives a bark and scuds off. Can’t eat a
dog. Don’t know how it will be to-morrow though. Might be well enough
for him to come around later. Well, it is most dark and will get
ready to try and sleep. Have broken off spruce boughs and made a soft
bed. Have heard my father tell of sleeping on a bed of spruce, and it
is healthy. Will try it. Not a crust to eat since yesterday forenoon.
Am educated to this way of living though, and have been hungryer.
Hope the pesky alligators will let me alone. If they only knew it, I
would make a poor meal for them. Thus closes my first day of freedom
and it is _grand_. Only hope they may be many, although I can hardly
hope to escape to our lines, not being in a condition to travel.

Nov. 24.—Another beautiful morning, a repetition of yesterday, opens
up to me. It is particularly necessary that I procure sustenance
wherewith life is prolonged, and will change my head-quarters to a
little nearer civilization. Can hear some one chopping not a mile
away. Here goes. LATER.—Found an old negro fixing up a dilapidated
post and rail fence. Approached him and enquired the time of day. (My
own watch having run down.) He didn’t happen to have his gold watch
with him, but reckoned it was nigh time for the horn. Seemed scared
at the apparition that appeared to him, and no wonder. Forgave him
on the spot. Thought it policy to tell him all about who and what
I was, and did so. Was very timid and afraid, but finally said he
would divide his dinner as soon as it should be sent to him, and
for an hour I lay off a distance of twenty rods or so, waiting for
that dinner. It finally came, brought by the same boy I saw go along
yesterday. Boy sat down the pail and the old darkey told him to
scamper off home—which he did. Then we had dinner of rice, cold yams
and fried bacon. It was a glorious repast, and I succeeded in getting
quite well acquainted with him. We are on the Bowden plantation and
he belongs to a family of that name. Is very fearful of helping me
as his master is a strong Secesh., and he says would whip him within
an inch of his life if it was known. Promise him not to be seen by
any one and he has promised to get me something more to eat after
it gets dark. LATER.—After my noonday meal went back toward the low
ground and waited for my supper, which came half an hour ago and it
is not yet dark. Had a good supper of boiled seasoned turnips, corn
bread and sour milk, the first milk I have had in about a year. Begs
me to go off in the morning, which I have promised to do. Says for me
to go two or three miles on to another plantation owned by LeCleye,
where there are good negroes who will feed me. Thanked the old fellow
for his kindness. Says the war is about over and the Yanks expected
to free them all soon. It’s getting pretty dark now, and I go to bed
filled to overflowing; in fact, most too much so.

Nov. 25.—This morning got up cold and stiff; not enough covering.
Pushed off in the direction pointed out by the darkey of yesterday.
Have come in the vicinity of negro shanties and laying in wait for
some good benevolent colored brother. Most too many dogs yelping
around to suit a runaway Yankee. Little nigs and the canines run
together. If I can only attract their attention without scaring them
to death, shall be all right. However, there is plenty of time, and
won’t rush things. Time is not valuable with me. Will go sure and
careful. Don’t appear to be any men folks around; more or less women
of all shades of color. This is evidently a large plantation; has
thirty or forty negro huts in three or four rows. They are all neat
and clean to outward appearances. In the far distance and toward
what I take to be the main road is the master’s residence. Can just
see a part of it. Has a cupola on top and is an ancient structure.
Evidently a nice plantation. Lots of cactus grows wild all over, and
is bad to tramp through. There is also worlds of palm leaves, such as
five cent fans are made of. Hold on there, two or three negro men are
coming from the direction of the big house to the huts. Don’t look
very inviting to trust your welfare with. Will still wait, McCawber
like, for something to turn up. If they only knew the designs I have
on them, they would turn pale. Shall be ravenous by night and go
for them. I am near a spring of water, and lay down flat and drink.
The “Astor House Mess” is moving around for a change; hope I won’t
make a mess of it. Lot of goats looking at me now, wondering, I
suppose, what it is. Wonder if they butt? Shoo! Going to rain, and
if so I must sleep in one of those shanties. Negroes all washing
up and getting ready to eat, with doors open. No, thank you; dined
yesterday. Am reminded of the song: “What shall we do, when the war
breaks the country up, and scatters us poor darkys all around.”
This getting away business is about the best investment I ever made.
Just the friendliest fellow ever was. More than like a colored man,
and will stick closer than a brother if they will only let me. Laugh
when I think of the old darky of yesterday’s experience, who liked
me first rate only wanted me to go away. Have an eye on an isolated
hut that looks friendly. Shall approach it at dark. People at the hut
are a woman and two or three children, and a jolly looking and acting
negro man. Being obliged to lay low in the shade feel the cold, as
it is rather damp and moist. LATER.—Am in the hut and have eaten a
good supper. Shall sleep here to-night. The negro man goes early in
the morning, together with all the male darky population, to work on
fortifications at Fort McAllister. Says the whole country is wild
at the news of approaching Yankee army. Negro man named “Sam” and
woman “Sady.” Two or three negroes living here in these huts are not
trustworthy, and I must keep very quiet and not be seen. Children
perfectly awe struck at the sight of a Yankee. Negroes very kind
but afraid. Criminal to assist me. Am five miles from Doctortown.
Plenty of “gubers” and yams. Tell them all about my imprisonment.
Regard the Yankees as their friends. Half a dozen neighbors come
in by invitation, shake hands with me, scrape the floor with their
feet, and rejoice most to death at the good times coming. “Bress
de Lord,” has been repeated hundreds of times in the two or three
hours I have been here. Surely I have fallen among friends. All the
visitors donate of their eatables, and although enough is before me
to feed a dozen men, I give it a tussle. Thus ends the second day of
my freedom, and it is glorious.

Nov. 26.—An hour before daylight “Sam” awoke me and said I must go
with him off a ways to stay through the day. Got up, and we started.
Came about a mile to a safe hiding place, and here I am. Have plenty
to eat and near good water. Sam will tell another trusty negro of
my whereabouts, who will look after me, as he has to go away to
work. The negroes are very kind, and I evidently am in good hands.
Many of those who will not fight in the Confederate army are hid
in these woods and swamps, and there are many small squads looking
them up with dogs and guns to force them into the rebel ranks. All
able-bodied men are conscripted into the army in the South. It is
possible I may be captured by some of these hunting parties. It is
again most night and have eaten the last of my food. Can hear the
baying of hounds and am skeery. Shall take in all the food that
comes this way in the meantime. Sam gave me an old jack knife and
I shall make a good bed to sleep on, and I also have an additional
part of a blanket to keep me warm. In fine spirits and have hopes for
the future. Expect an ambassador from my colored friends a little
later. LATER.—The ambassador has come and gone in the shape of a
woman. Brought food; a man told her to tell me to go off a distance
of two miles or so, to the locality pointed out, before daylight, and
wait there until called upon to-morrow. Rebel guards occupy the main
roads, and very unsafe.

Nov. 27.—Before daylight came where I now am. Saw alligators—small
ones. This out in the woods life is doing me good. Main road three
miles away, but there are paths running everywhere. Saw a white man
an hour ago. Think he was a skulker hiding to keep out of the army,
but afraid to hail him. Many of these stay in the woods day-times,
and at night go to their homes, getting food. Am now away quite a
distance from any habitation, and am afraid those who will look for
me cannot find me. Occasionally hear shots fired; this is a dangerous
locality. Have now been out four days and fared splendidly. Have
hurt one of my ankles getting through the brush; sort of sprain, and
difficult to travel at all. No water near by and must move as soon
as possible. Wild hogs roam around through the woods, and can run
like a deer. Palm leaves grow in great abundance, and are handsome to
look at. Some of them very large. Occasionally see lizards and other
reptiles, and am afraid of them. If I was a good traveler I could
get along through the country and possibly to our lines. Must wander
around and do the best I can however. Am armed with my good stout
cane and the knife given me by the negro; have also some matches, but
dare not make a fire lest it attract attention. Nights have to get
up occasionally and stamp around to get warm. Clear, cool nights and
pleasant. Most too light, however, for me to travel. The remnants of
yesterday’s food, have just eaten. Will now go off in an easterly
direction in hopes of seeing the messenger.

Nov. 28.—No one has come to me since day before yesterday. Watched
and moved until most night of yesterday but could see or hear no
one. Afraid I have lost communication. In the distance can see a
habitation and will mog along that way. Most noon. LATER.—As I
was poking along through some light timber, almost ran into four
Confederates with guns. Lay down close to the ground and they passed
by me not more than twenty rods away. Think they have heard of my
being in the vicinity and looking me up. This probably accounts for
not receiving any visitor from the negroes. Getting very hungry, and
no water fit to drink. Must get out of this community as fast as I
can. Wish to gracious I had two good legs. LATER.—It is now nearly
dark and I have worked my way as near direct north as I know how. Am
at least four miles from where I lay last night. Have seen negroes,
and white men, but did not approach them. Am completely tired out and
hungry, but on the edge of a nice little stream of water. The closing
of the fifth day of my escape. Must speak to somebody to-morrow, or
starve to death. Good deal of yelling in the woods. Am now in the
rear of a hovel which is evidently a negro hut, but off quite a ways
from it. Cleared ground all around the house so I can’t approach it
without being too much in sight. Small negro boy playing around the
house. Too dark to write more.

Nov. 29.—The sixth day of freedom, and a hungry one. Still where I
wrote last night, and watching the house. A woman goes out and in but
cannot tell much about her from this distance. No men folks around.
Two or three negro boys playing about. Must approach the house, but
hate to. NOON.—Still right here. Hold my position. More than hungry.
Three days since I have eaten anything, with the exception of a small
potatoe and piece of bread eaten two days ago and left from the day
before. That length of time would have been nothing in Andersonville,
but now being in better health demand eatables, and it takes right
hold of this wandering sinner. Shall go to the house towards night.
A solitary woman lives there with some children. My ankle from the
sprain and yesterday’s walking is swollen and painful. Bathe it in
water, which does it good. Chickens running around. Have serious
meditations of getting hold of one or two of them after they go to
roost, then go farther back into the wilderness, build a fire with my
matches and cook them. That would be a royal feast. But if caught at
it, it would go harder with me than if caught legitimately. Presume
this is the habitation of some of the skulkers who return and stay
home nights. Believe that chickens squawk when being taken from the
roost. Will give that up and walk boldly up to the house.




RE-CAPTURED.

  HOME GUARDS GOBBLE ME UP—WELL TREATED AND WELL FED—TAKEN TO
  DOCTORTOWN AND FROM THENCE TO BLACKSHEAR—THE TWO BUCK BOYS AS
  RUNAWAYS—RIDE ON A PASSENGER TRAIN—PROSPECTS AHEAD, ETC.


DOCTORTOWN STATION, NO. 5, Nov. 30.—Ha! Ha! My boy, you are a
prisoner of war again. Once more with a blasted rebel standing guard
over me, and it all happened in this wise: Just before dark I went
up to that house I spoke of in my writings yesterday. Walked boldly
up and rapped at the door; and what was my complete astonishment
when a white woman answered my rapping. Asked me what I wanted, and
I told her something to eat. Told me to come in and set down. She
was a dark looking woman and could easily be mistaken from my hiding
place of the day for a negro. Began asking me questions. Told her I
was a rebel soldier, had been in the hospital sick and was trying
to reach home in the adjoining county. Was very talkative; told how
her husband had been killed at Atlanta, &c. She would go out and in
from a shanty kitchen in her preparation of my supper. I looked out
through a window and saw a little darky riding away from the house,
a few minutes after I went inside. Thought I had walked into a trap,
and was very uneasy. Still the woman talked and worked, and I talked,
telling as smoothe lies as I knew how. For a full hour and a half sat
there, and she all the time getting supper. Made up my mind that I
was the same as captured, and so put on a bold face and made the best
of it. Was very well satisfied with my escapade anyway, if I could
only get a whack at that supper before the circus commenced. Well,
after a while heard some hounds coming through the woods and towards
the house. Looked at the woman and her face pleaded guilty, just as
if she had done something very mean. The back door of the house was
open and pretty soon half a dozen large blood hounds bounded into the
room and began snuffing me over; about this time the woman began to
cry. Told her I understood the whole thing and she need not make a
scene over it. Said she knew I was a yankee and had sent for some men
at Doctortown. Then five horsemen surrounded the house, dismounted
and four of them came in with guns cocked prepared for a desperate
encounter. I said: “good evening, gentlemen.” “Good evening,” said
the foremost, “we are looking for a runaway yankee prowling around
here.” “Well,” says I, “you needn’t look any farther, you have found
him.” “Yes, I see,” was the answer. They all sat down, and just then
the woman said “supper is ready and to draw nigh.” Drawed as nigh as
I could to that supper and proceeded to take vengeance on the woman.
The fellows proved to be home guards stationed here at Doctortown.
The woman had mounted the negro boy on a horse just as soon as I
made my appearance at the house and sent for them. They proved to be
good fellows. Talked there at the house a full hour on the fortunes
of war, &c. Told them of my long imprisonment and escape and all
about myself. After a while we got ready to start for this place.
One rebel rode in front, one on each side and two in the rear of me.
Was informed that if I tried to run they would shoot me. Told them
no danger of my running, as I could hardly walk. They soon saw that
such was the case after going a little way, and sent back one of
the men to borrow the woman’s horse. Was put on the animal’s back
and we reached Doctortown not far from midnight. As we were leaving
the house the woman gave me a bundle; said in it was a shirt and
stockings. Told her she had injured me enough and I would take them.
No false delicy will prevent my taking a shirt. And so my adventure
has ended and have enjoyed it hugely. Had plenty to eat with the
exception of the two days, and at the last had a horseback ride. How
well I was reminded of my last ride when first taken prisoner and at
the time I got the coverlid. In the bundle was a good white shirt,
pair of stockings, and a chunk of dried beef of two pounds or so.
One of the captors gave me ten dollars in Confederate money. Now am
in an old vacant building and guarded and it is the middle of the
afternoon. Many citizens have visited me and I tell the guard he
ought to charge admission; money in it. Some of the callers bring
food and are allowed to give it to me, and am stocked with more than
can conveniently carry. Have had a good wash up, put on my clean
white shirt with standing collar, and new stockings and am happy.
Doctortown is a small village with probably six or eight hundred
population, and nigger young ones by the scores. Am treated kindly
and well, and judge from conversations that I hear, that the battles
are very disastrous to the rebels and that the war is pretty well
over. All the negroes are hard pressed, fortifying every available
point to contest the advance of the Union Army. This is cheering news
to me. My escape has given me confidence in myself, and I shall try
it again the first opportunity. A woman has just given me a bottle of
milk and two dollars in money. Thanked her with my heart in my mouth.
Having been captured and brought to this place, am here waiting for
them to get instructions as to what they shall do with me. They say I
will probably be sent to the prison at Blackshear, which is forty or
fifty miles away. Think I should be content to stay here with plenty
to eat. Am in a good clean room in a dwelling. Can talk with any one
who chooses to come and see me. The room was locked during the night,
and this morning was thrown open, and I can wander through three
rooms. Guard is off a few rods where he can see all around the house.
Occasionally I go out doors and am having a good time. LATER.—Have
seen a Savannah paper which says Sherman and his hosts are marching
toward that city, and for the citizens to rally to repel the invader.
My swollen ankle is being rubbed to-day with ointment furnished by
an old darky. I tell you there are humane people the world over, who
will not see even an enemy suffer if they can help it. While I have
seen some of the worst people in the South, I have also seen some of
the very best, and those, too, who were purely southern people and
rebels. There are many pleasant associations connected with my prison
life, as well as some directly to the opposite.

Dec. 1.—Still at Doctortown, and the town is doctoring me up “right
smart.” There is also a joke to this, but a weak one. The whole
town are exercised over the coming of the Yankee army, and I laugh
in my sleeve. Once in a while some poor ignorant and bigoted fellow
amuses himself cursing me and the whole U. S. army. Don’t talk back
much, having too much regard for my bodily comfort. Orders have
come to put me on a train for Blackshear. Have made quite a number
of friends here, who slyly talk to me encouragingly. There are many
Union people all through the South, although they have not dared to
express themselves as such, but now they are more decided in their
expressions and actions. Had a canteen of milk, and many other
luxuries. Darkys are profuse in their gifts of small things. Have now
a comb, good jack knife, and many little nicknacks. One old negress
brought me a chicken nicely roasted. Think of that, prisoners of war,
roast chicken! Shall jump off the cars every twenty rods hereafter.
Tried to get a paper of the guard, who was reading the latest, but
he wouldn’t let me see it. Looks rather blue himself, and I surmise
there is something in it which he don’t like. All right, old fellow,
my turn will come some day. Young darky brought me a cane, which is
an improvement on my old one. Walk now the length of my limit with an
old fashioned crook cane and feel quite proud. LATER.—Got all ready
to take a train due at 3:30, and it didn’t stop. Must wait until
morning. Hope they won’t stop for a month.

BLACKSHEAR, GA., Dec. 2.—In with the same men whom I deserted on the
cars. We are near the Florida line. Was put in a passenger train at
Doctortown and rode in style to this place. On the train were two
more Yanks named David and Eli S. Buck, who are Michigan men. They
were runaways who had been out in the woods nearly three months
and were in sight of our gunboats when recaptured. Belong to the
6th Michigan Cavalry. David Buck was one of Kilpatrick’s scouts; a
very smart and brave fellow, understands living in the woods, and
thoroughly posted. We have mutually agreed to get away the first
chance, and shall get to our lines. David Buck used to attend school
at Leoni, Mich., and was educated for a preacher. They are cousins.
We three Yankees were quite a curiosity to the passengers on the
train that brought us to this place. Some of them had evidently never
seen a Yankee before, and we were stared at for all we were worth.
Some smarties were anxious to argue the point with us in a rather “we
have got you” style. David Buck is a good talker, and satisfactorily
held up our end of the war question; in fact, I thought talked them
all out on their own grounds. The ladies in particular sneered and
stared at us. Occasionally we saw some faces which looked as if they
were Union, and we often got a kind word from some of them. The
railroads are in a broken down condition, out of decent repair, and
trains run very slow. The Confederacy is most assuredly hard up,
and will go to pieces some of these days. My out-door life of the
few days I roamed through the woods, was just jolly. Being out from
under rebel guard made me the happiest chap imaginable. Knew that I
couldn’t escape to our lines, as I was not able to travel much, and
my sole business was to remain a tramp as long as possible, and to
get enough to eat, which I did. The negroes, and especially the field
hands, are all Union darkys, and fed me all I wanted as a general
thing. Made a mistake in going to the house of a white woman for food.

Dec. 3.—Blackshear is an out-of-the-way place, and shouldn’t think
the Yankee army would ever find us here. The climate is delightful.
Here it is December and at the North right in the middle of winter,
and probably good sleighing, and cold; while here it is actually
warm during the day time, and at night not uncomfortably cold. The
Buck boys are jolly good fellows, and full of fun. Seem to have
taken a new lease of life myself. Both of them are in good health
and fleshy, and open for an escape any hour. And we don’t stay here
but a few days, the guards say. Why not keep us on the cars and run
us around the country all the time? There is no wall or anything
around us here, only guards. Encamped right in the open air. Have
food once a day, just whatever they have to give us. Last night had
sweet potatoes. I am getting considerably heavier in weight, and must
weigh one hundred and forty pounds or more. Still lame, however, and
I fear permanently so. Teeth are firm in my mouth now, and can eat as
well as ever, and oh! such an appetite. Would like to see the pile of
food that I couldn’t eat. Found Rowe and Bullock, and Hub Dakin. They
are well, and all live in jolly expectancy of the next move. The old
coverlid still protects my person. The Bucks have also each a good
blanket, and we are comfortable. Some fresh beef given us to-day; not
much, but suppose all they have got. Guard said he wished to God he
was one of us prisoners instead of guarding us.

Dec. 4.—Another delightfully cool morning. There are not a great
many guards here to watch over us, and it would be possible for all
to break away without much trouble. The men, however, are so sure of
liberty that they prefer to wait until given legitimately. Would like
to have seen this guard hold us last summer at Andersonville. Fresh
meat again to-day. Rebels go out to neighboring plantations and take
cattle, drive them here, and butcher for us to eat. Rice is also
given us to eat. Have plenty of wood to cook with. Have traded off
the old missmated pair of brogans for a smaller and good pair, and
feel quite like a dandy. Have some money to buy extras. Have plenty
of food yet from that given me at Doctortown. Divide with the Bucks,
or rather, it is all one common mess, and what any one owns belongs
equally to the others. Rebels glum, and cross, and sometimes we laugh
at them, and then they swear and tell us to shut up or they will blow
our heads off. Blackshear is a funny name and it is a funny town, if
there is any, for as yet I haven’t been able to see it. Probably a
barn and a hen-coop comprise the place. Cars go thundering by as if
the Yanks were after them. About every train loaded with troops. Go
first one way and then the other. Think they are trying to keep out
of the way themselves.

Dec. 5.—Guard said that orders were not to talk with any of the
prisoners, and above all not to let us get hold of any newspapers.
No citizens are allowed to come near us. That shows which way the
wind blows. Half a dozen got away from here last night, and guards
more strict to-day, with an increased force. Going to be moved, it is
said, in a few days. Why don’t they run us right into the ocean? That
wouldn’t do though, our gunboats are there. Well, keep us then, that
is punishment enough. Do what you are a mind to. You dare not starve
us now, for we would break away. In fact, although under guard, we
are masters of the situation. Can see an old darky with an ox hitched
to a cart with harness on, the cart loaded with sugar cane. This is
quite a sugar country, it is said. On the road here saw the famous
palmetto tree in groves. Live-oaks are scattered all over, and are
a funny affair. Persimmon and pecan trees also abound here. We are
pretty well south now, spending the winter. But few die now; no more
than would naturally die in any camp with the same numbers. It is
said that some men get away every night, and it is probably so.

Dec. 6.—Thirteen months ago to-day captured—one year and one month.
Must be something due me from Uncle Sam in wages, by this time. All
come in a lump when it does come. No great loss without small gain,
and while I have been suffering the long imprisonment my wages have
been accumulating. Believe that we are also entitled to ration money
while in prison. Pile it on, you can’t pay us any too much for this
business. This is the land of the blood hound. Are as common as the
ordinary cur at the North. Are a noble looking dog except when they
are after you, and then they are beastly. Should think that any one
of them could whip a man; are very large, strong, and savage looking.
Should think it would be hard for the negro to run away. See no
horses about here at all—all mules and oxen, and even cows hitched up
to draw loads. I walk the prison over forty times a day. Everybody
knows me, and I hail and am hailed as I walk around, and am asked
what I think of the situation. Tell them of my escape and the good
time I had, which incites them to do likewise the first opportunity.
Occasionally a man here who growls and grumbles, and says and thinks
we will never get away, &c. Some would find fault if they were going
to be hung. Should think they would compare their condition with that
of six months ago and be contented.

Dec. 7.—Another day of smiling weather. Still call our mess the
“Astor House Mess.” It is composed of only three—the Bucks and
myself. I am the only one of the original mess here, and it is still
the most prosperous and best fed of any. We are all the time at
work at something. Have a good piece of soap, and have washed our
clothing throughout, and are clean and neat for prisoners of war.
Eli S. Buck is a large fellow, and a farmer when at home. Both are
young, and from the same neighborhood. As I have said before, are
cousins, and think a great deal of one another, which is good to see.
Relatives rarely get along together in prison as well as those who
are not related. There were brothers in Andersonville who would not
mess together. Seems funny, but such is the case. Should like to see
myself throwing over a brother for any one else. Guards denounce Jeff
Davis as the author of their misfortunes. We also denounce him as the
author of ours, so we are agreed on one point. Going to move. The
“mess” will escape _en masse_ at the first move, just for the sake
of roaming the woods. With the Bucks in company with me, shall have
a good time, and we can undoubtedly soon reach our troops in as much
as they are raiding through the South. Dave Buck is the acknowledged
leader of us. He prays; think of that.

Dec. 8.—There are many men of many minds here. That used to be a
favorite copy at writing school in Jackson, Mich. “Many men of many
minds, many birds of many kinds.” How a person’s thoughts go back
to the old boyhood days in such a place as this. Happiest times of
life are those of youth, but we didn’t know it. Everybody told us so,
but we didn’t believe it; but now it is plain. Every one, I think,
has that experience. We all see where we might have done different
if we only had our lives to live over, but alas, it is not to be. A
majority of the men here have about half enough to eat. Our mess has
enough to eat, thanks to our own ingenuity. Now expect to go away
from here every day. Have borrowed a needle, begged some thread, and
have been sewing up my clothing; am well fixed up, as are also the
Bucks. Am quite handy with the needle, and it is difficult to make
some of them believe I am not a tailor by trade. If I always keep my
ways mended as I do my clothes, I shall get along very well. Eli has
come with four large yams bought of a guard and we will proceed to
cook and eat a good supper, and then go to bed and perhaps dream of
something pleasant to remember the next day. Rumors of all kinds in
camp, and rebels say something is up that will interest us, but I can
get no satisfaction as to what it is. Drew cuts for the extra potato,
and Dave won, and he cut that article of food into three pieces and
we all had a share. Good boy.

Dec. 9.—Still in Blackshear, and quiet. Many incidents happened
when I was out in the wood, and I am just crazy to get there once
more. Look at the tall trees in sight, and could hug them. My long
sickness and the terrible place in which I was confined so long,
and my recovering health, and the hope now of getting entirely well
and recovering my liberty, has made a new man of me—a new lease of
life, as it were. The Bucks are the best of fellows, and having money
which they use for my benefit the same as their own, we get along
swimmingly. One of these days my Northern friends and relatives will
hear from me. Am getting over my lameness, and have an appetite for
more than my supply of food. Certainly had a good constitution to
stand all that has been passed through, during which time thousands
and thousands died, of apparently better health than myself. Of all
my many mess-mates and friends in prison, have lost track of them
all; some died, in fact nearly all, and the balance scattered, the
Lord only knows where. What stories we can talk over when we meet at
the North. This Blackshear country is rather a nice section. Warm and
pleasant, although rather low. Don’t know where we are located, but
must be not far from the coast.

Dec. 10.—The grand change has come and a car load of prisoners go
away from here to-day. Although the Bucks and myself were the last
in prison, we are determined to flank out and go with the first that
go. Our destination is probably Charleston, from what I can learn. We
three will escape on the road, or make a desperate effort to do so,
anyway. Can walk much better now than ten days ago, and feel equal to
the emergency. Fine weather and in good spirits, although many here
are tired of being moved from place to place. More guards have come
to take charge of us on the road, and it looks very discouraging for
getting away, although “Dave” says we will make it all right. Place
great reliance in him, as he has caution as well as the intention to
escape. So like Hendryx, and added to it has more practical quiet
common sense. Eli Buck and myself acknowledge him as leader in all
things. Now comes the tug of war.

Dec. 11.—We flanked out this morning, or rather paid three fellows
two dollars apiece for their turn to go. Are now thirty miles from
Blackshear; have been unloaded from the cars and are encamped by the
side of the railroad track for the night. Most dark. Rebel soldiers
going by on the trains, with hoots and yells. We are strongly
guarded, and it augurs not for us to get away to-night. Our best hold
is jumping from the cars. Ride on open platform cars with guards
standing and sitting on the sides, six guards to each car. About
sixty prisoners ride on each car, and there are thirty or forty
cars. Were given rations yesterday, but none to-day. It is said we
get nothing to eat to-night, which is bad; more so for the other
prisoners than ourselves. Low country we come through, and swampy.
Bucks think we may get away before morning, but I doubt it. Rebs
flying around lively, and Yanks going for them I guess.

Dec. 12.—Routed up at an early hour and loaded on to the cars, which
stood upon a side track, and after being loaded have been here for
six mortal hours. Small rations given us just before loading up. All
are cramped up and mad. We will more than jump the first opportunity.
We go to Charleston, via Savannah. Wish they would hurry up their old
vehicles for transportation. Being doubled up like a jack knife makes
my legs stiff and sore, and difficult to use my limbs from cramped
position. Worth four hundred dollars a day to see the rebel troops
fly around. Would give something to know the exact position now of
both armies. Guards are sleepy and tired out from doing double duty,
and I think we can get away if they move us by night, which I am
afraid they won’t do. Bucks jubilant and confident, consequently so
am I.




A SUCCESSFUL ESCAPE.

  JUMP OFF THE CARS NEAR SAVANNAH—FIND FRIENDLY NEGROES—TRAVEL BY
  NIGHT AND REST BY DAY—GOOD TIMES WITH MANY ADVENTURES—A MORNING
  BATH—ALMOST RUN INTO REBEL PICKETS, ETC., ETC.


IN THE WOODS, Dec 13.—How does that sound for a location to date
from? Yesterday long toward night our train started from its abiding
place and rolled slowly toward its destination, wherever that might
be. When near Savannah, not more than a mile this side, David Buck
jumped off the cars and rolled down the bank. I jumped next and Eli
Buck came right after me. Hastily got up and joined one another,
and hurried off in an easterly direction through the wet, swampy
country. A number of shots were fired at us, but we were surprised
and glad to find that none hit us, although my cap was knocked off
by a bullet hitting the fore-piece. Eli Buck was also singed by a
bullet. It seemed as if a dozen shots were fired. Train did not stop,
and we ran until tired out. Knew that we were within a line of forts
which encircle Savannah, going all the way around it and only twenty
rods or so apart. It was dark when we jumped off, and we soon came
in the vicinity of a school house in which was being held a negro
prayer meeting. We peeked in at the windows, but dared not stop so
near our jumping off place. Worked around until we were near the
railroad again and guided by the track going south—the same way we
had come. It was very dark. Dave Buck went ahead, Eli next and myself
last, going Indian file and very slow. All at once Dave stopped and
whispered to us to keep still, which you may be sure we did. Had come
within ten feet of a person who was going directly in the opposite
direction and also stopped, at the same time we did. Dave Buck says:
“Who comes there?” A negro woman says “it’s me,” and he walked up
close to her and asked where she was going. She says: “Oh! I knows
you; you are Yankees and has jumped off de cars.” By this time we had
come up even with Dave and the woman. Owned up to her that such was
the case. She said we were her friends, and would not tell of us.
Also said that not twenty rods ahead there was a rebel picket, and we
were going right into them. I think if I ever wanted to kiss a woman,
it was that poor, black, negro wench. She told us to go about thirty
rods away and near an old shed, and she would send us her brother;
he would know what to do. We went to the place designated and waited
there an hour, and then we saw two dusky forms coming through the
darkness, and between them a wooden tray of food consisting of boiled
turnips, corn bread and smoked bacon. We lay there behind that old
shed and ate and talked, and talked and ate, for a full hour more.
The negro, “Major,” said he was working on the forts, putting them in
order to oppose the coming of the Yankees, and he thought he could
get us through the line before morning to a safe hiding place. If
we all shook hands once we did fifty times, all around. The negroes
were fairly jubilant at being able to help genuine Yankees. Were very
smart colored people, knowing more than the ordinary run of their
race. Major said that in all the forts was a reserve picket force,
and between the forts the picket. He said pretty well south was a
dilapidated fort which had not as yet been repaired any, and that
was the one to go through or near, as he did not think there was any
picket there. “Bress de Lord, for yo’ safety,” says the good woman.
We ate all they brought us, and then started under the guidance of
Major at somewhere near midnight. Walked slow and by a roundabout
way to get to the fort and was a long time about it, going through a
large turnip patch and over and through hedges. Major’s own safety
as much as ours depended upon the trip. Finally came near the fort
and discovered there were rebels inside and a picket off but a few
rods. Major left us and crawled slowly ahead to reconnoitre; returned
in a few minutes and told us to follow. We all climbed over the side
of the fort, which was very much out of repair. The reserve picket
was asleep around a fire which had nearly gone out. Major piloted
us through the fort, actually stepping over the sleeping rebels.
After getting on the outside there was a wide ditch which we went
through. Ditch was partially full of water. We then went way round
near the railroad again, and started south, guided by the darky, who
hurried us along at a rapid gait. By near daylight we were five or
six miles from Savannah, and then stopped for consultation and rest.
Finally went a mile further, where we are now laying low in a swamp,
pretty well tired out and muddy beyond recognition. Major left us at
daylight, saying he would find us a guide before night who would show
us still further. He had to go back and work on the forts. And so I
am again loose, a free man, with the same old feeling I had when in
the woods before. We got out of a thick settled country safely, and
again await developments. Heard drums and bugles playing reveille
this morning in many directions, and “We are all surrounded.” David
Buck is very confident of getting away to our lines. Eli thinks it
is so if Dave says so, and I don’t know, or care so very much. The
main point with me is to stay out in the woods as long as I can. My
old legs have had a hard time of it since last night and ache, and
are very lame. It’s another beautiful and cold day, this 13th of
December. Biting frost nights, but warmer in the day time. Our plan
is to work our way to the Ogechee River, and wait for the Stars and
Stripes to come to us. Major said Sherman was marching right toward
us all the time, driving the rebel army with no trouble at all. Told
us to keep our ears open and we would hear cannon one of these days,
possibly within a week. The excitement of the last twenty-four hours
has worn me out, and I couldn’t travel to-day if it was necessary.
Have a plenty to eat, and for a wonder I ain’t hungry for anything
except things we haven’t got. Dave is happy as an oyster, and wants
to yell. Where they are so confident I am satisfied all will be
well. As soon as it comes night we are going up to some negro huts
less than a mile off, where we hope and expect that Major has posted
the inmates in regard to us. The railroad is only a short distance
off, and the river only three or four miles. As near as we know, are
about twenty miles from the Atlantic coast. Tell the boys it may be
necessary for me to stay here for two or three days to get recruited
up, but they think three or four miles to-night will do me good.
Don’t like to burden them and shall try it.

[Illustration: David Buck.]

Dec. 14.—We are now three miles from yesterday’s resting place,
and near the Miller plantation. Soon as dark last night we went to
the negro huts and found them expecting us. Had a jubilee. No whites
near, but all away. The Buck boys passed near here before when out
in the woods, and knew of many darkys who befriended them. Had a
surfeit of food. Stayed at the huts until after midnight, and then
a woman brought us to this place. To-night we go to Jocko’s hut,
across the river. A darky will row us across the Little Ogechee to
Jocco’s hut, and then he will take us in tow. It is a rice country
about here, with canals running every way. Negroes all tickled to
death because Yankees coming. I am feeling better than yesterday, but
difficult to travel. Tell the boys they had better leave me with the
friendly blacks and go ahead to our lines, but they won’t. Plenty to
eat and milk to drink, which is just what I want. The whites now are
all away from their homes and most of the negroes. Imagine we can
hear the booming of cannon, but guess we are mistaken. Dave is very
entertaining and good company. Don’t get tired of him and his talk.
Both of them are in rebel dress throughout, and can talk and act just
like rebels. Know the commanders of different rebel regiments. They
say that when out before they on different occasions mixed with the
Southern army, without detection. Said they didn’t wonder the widow
woman knew I was a Yankee. Ain’t up to that kind of thing.

Dec. 15.—Jocko’s hut was not across the river as I supposed and
wrote yesterday, but on the same side we were on. At about ten
o’clock last night we went to his abiding place as directed and
knocked. After a long time an old black head was stuck out of the
window with a nightcap on. The owner of the head didn’t know Jocko
or anything about him; was short and crusty; said: “Go way from
dar!” Kept talking to him and he scolding at being disturbed. Said
he had rheumatics and couldn’t get out to let us in. After a long
time opened the door and we set down on the door step. Told him we
were yankees and wanted help. Was the funniest darky we have met yet.
Would give something for his picture as he was framed in his window
in the moonlight talking to us, with the picturesque surroundings,
and us yankees trying to win him over to aid us. Finally owned up
that he was Jocko, but said he couldn’t row us across the river. He
was lame and could not walk, had no boat, and if he had the river
was so swift he couldn’t get us across, and if it wasn’t swift, the
rebels would catch him at it and hang him. Talked a long time and
with much teasing. By degrees his scruples gave way, one at a time.
Didn’t know but he might row us across if he only had a boat, and
finally didn’t know but he could find a boat. To get thus far into
his good graces took at least three hours. Went looking around and
found an old scow, fixed up some old oars, and we got in; before
doing so however, he had warmed up enough to give us some boiled
sweet potatoes and cold baked fish. Rowed us way down the river and
landed us on the noted Miller plantation and a mile in rear of the
negro houses. Jocko, after we forced our acquaintance on him with all
kind of argument, proved to be a smart able-bodied old negro, but
awful afraid of being caught helping runaways. Would give something
for his picture as he appeared to us looking out of his cabin window.
Just an old fashioned, genuine negro, and so black that charcoal
would make a white mark on him. Took us probably three miles from
his hut, two miles of water and one of land, and then started back
home after shaking us a dozen times by the hand, and “God blessing
us.” Said “Ole Massa Miller’s niggers all Union niggers,” and to go
up to the huts in broad daylight and they would help us. No whites
at home on the plantation. We arrived where Jocko left us an hour
or so before daylight, and lay down to sleep until light. I woke
up after a while feeling wet, and found the tide had risen and we
were surrounded with water; woke up the boys and scrambled out of
that in a hurry, going through two feet of water in some places.
The spot where we had laid down was a higher piece of ground than
that adjoining. Got on to dry land and proceeded to get dry. At
about ten o’clock Dave went up to the negro huts and made himself
known, which was hard work. The negroes are all afraid that we are
rebels and trying to get them into a scrape, but after we once get
them thoroughly satisfied that we are genuine Yanks they are all
right, and will do anything for us. The negroes have shown us the
big house, there being no whites around, they having left to escape
the coming Yankee army. We went up into the cupola and looked way
off on the ocean, and saw our own noble gunboats. What would we
give to be aboard of them? Their close proximity makes us discuss
the feasibility of going down the river and out to them, but the
negroes say there are chain boats across the river farther down, and
picketed. Still it makes us anxious, our being so near, and we have
decided to go down the river to-night in a boat and see if we can’t
reach them. It is now the middle of the afternoon and we lay off from
the huts eighty rods, and the negroes are about to bring us some
dinner. During the night we traveled over oyster beds by the acre,
artificial ones, and they cut our feet. Negroes say there are two
other runaways hid a mile off and they are going to bring them to our
abiding place. LATER.—Negroes have just fed us with corn bread and a
kind of fish about the size of sardines, boiled by the kettle full,
and they are nice. Fully as good as sardines. Think I know now where
nearly all the imported sardines come from. Negroes catch them by the
thousand, in nets, put them in kettles, and cook them a few minutes,
when they are ready to eat. Scoop them out of the creeks. The two
other runaways are here with us. They are out of the 3d Ohio Cavalry.
Have been out in the woods for two weeks. Escaped from Blackshear
and traveled this far. I used to know one of them in Savannah. We do
not take to them at all, as they are not of our kind. Shall separate
to-night, they going their way and we going ours. Have secured a
dug-out boat to go down the Ogechee River with to-night. The negroes
tell us of a Mr. Kimball, a white man, living up the country fifteen
miles, who is a Union man, and helps runaways, or any one of Union
proclivities. He lays up the river, and our gunboats lay down the
river. Both have wonderful charms for us, and shall decide before
night which route to take. Are on rice plantation, and a valuable
one. Before the “wah” there were over fifteen hundred negroes on this
place. Cotton is also part of the production. Have decided to go
down the river and try to reach our gunboats. It’s a very hazardous
undertaking, and I have my doubts as to its successful termination.

Dec. 16.—Another adventure, and a red hot one. Started down the river
in our dug-out boat somewhere near midnight. Ran down all right
for an hour, frequently seeing rebel pickets and camp fires. Saw
we were going right into the lion’s mouth, as the farther down the
more rebels. All at once our boat gave a lurch and landed in a tree
top which was sticking out of the water, and there we were, swaying
around in the cold water in the middle or near the middle of the
Ogechee. Dave went ashore and to a negro hut, woke up the inmates,
and narrated our troubles. A negro got up, and with another boat came
to the rescue. Were about froze with the cold and wet. Said not more
than a mile farther down we would have run right into a chain boat,
with pickets posted on it. It really seems as if a Divine providence
were guiding us. After getting a breakfast of good things started
off toward the Big Ogechee River, and have traveled three or four
miles. Are now encamped, or rather laying down, on a little hillock
waiting for evening, to get out of this vicinity which is a dangerous
one. In our river escapade lost many of our things, but still hang to
my coverlid and diary. There are three or four houses in view, and
principally white residences, those of the poor white trash order,
and they are the very ones we must avoid. Have caught cold and am
fearfully out of traveling condition, but must go it now. A mistake
in coming down the river. Am resting up, preparatory to traveling all
night up the country. No chance of getting out by the coast. Have
enough food to last all day and night, and that is a good deal. Can’t
carry more than a day’s supply. Have now been out in the woods, this
is the fourth day, and every day has been fresh adventures thick
and fast. If I could only travel like my comrades, would get along.
Bucks praise me up and encourage me to work away, and I do. For
breakfast had more of those imported sardines. Storm brewing of some
sort and quite chilly. Saw rebel infantry marching along the highway
not more than eighty rods off. Hugged the ground very close. Dogs
came very near us, and if they had seen us would have attracted the
rebels’ attention. Am writing with a pencil less than an inch long.
Shall print this diary and make my everlasting fortune, and when
wealthy will visit this country and make every negro who has helped
us millionaires. Could not move from here half a mile by daylight
without being seen, and as a consequence we are feeling very sore
on the situation. Don’t know but I shall be so lame to-night that I
cannot walk at all, and then the boys must leave me and go ahead for
themselves. However, they say I am worth a hundred dead men yet, and
will prod me along like a tired ox. Dave goes now bareheaded, or not
quite so bad as that, as he has a handkerchief tied over his head.
The programme now is to go as straight to Mr. Kimball’s as we can. He
is probably twenty miles away; is a white Union man I spoke of a day
or so ago in this same diary. Will stick to him like a brother. Can
hear wagons go along the road toward Savannah, which is only thirteen
or fourteen miles away. LATER.—Most dark enough to travel and I have
straightened up and am taking an inventory of myself. Find I can walk
with the greatest difficulty. The boys argue that after I get warmed
up I will go like a top, and we will see.

Dec. 17.—And another day of vicissitudes. We traveled last night
about four miles, piloted by a young negro. It was a terrible walk to
me; slow and painful. Were fed, and have food for to-day. Are now
about three miles from a canal which we must cross before another
morning. Negroes say “Sherman most here” and “Bress de Lord!” Mr.
Kimball lives nine miles away and we must reach him some way, but
it seems an impossibility for me to go so far. Are now in a high
and fine country, but too open for us. Have to lay down all day in
the bushes. David is a thorough scout. Goes crawling around on his
hands and knees taking in his bearings. Troops are encamped on the
main road. Every cross road has its pickets, and it is slow business
to escape running into them. Eli S. Buck has a sore throat and is
hoarse. Pretty good jaunt for him, tough as he is. Shall have no
guide to-night, as Dave thinks he can engineer us all right in
the right direction. Some thinks he will leave us both and reach
Kimball’s to-night, and then come back and see us through. Guess I
will be on hand to go along however.

Dec. 18.—Six days of freedom and what a sight of hardship, sweetened
by kind treatment and the satisfaction of being out from under
guard. We traveled last night some four miles and now are in a very
precarious position. When almost daylight we came to the canal, and
found cavalry pickets all along the tow-path; walked along until we
came to a lock. A cavalryman was riding his horse up and down by the
lock. At the lock there was a smouldering fire. It was absolutely
necessary that we get across before daylight. As the mounted picket
turned his horse’s head to go from us, Dave slid across the tow-path
and went across the timbers which formed the lock, and by the time
the picket turned around to come back Dave was hid on the opposite
shore. At the next trip of the rebel Eli went the same as Dave. The
third one to go was myself, and I expected to get caught, sure. Could
not go as quiet as the rest, and was slower. Thought the picket saw
me when half way across but kept right on going, and for a wonder
made it all right. Was thoroughly scared for the first time since
jumping off the train. Am very nervous. All shook hands when the
picket turned about to go back the fourth time. Getting light in
the east and we must move on, as the country is very open. Dare not
travel over half a mile, and here we are hid almost in a woman’s door
yard, not over thirty rods from her very door. Are in some evergreen
bushes and shrubs. It’s now most noon, and have seen a rather elderly
lady go out and in the house a number of times. The intrepid Dave is
going up to the house to interview the lady soon. LATER.—Dave crawled
along from our hiding place until he came to the open ground, and
then straightened boldly up and walked to the house. In fifteen
minutes he came back with some bread and dried beef, and said the
woman was a Union woman and would help us. Her daughter slept at
her uncle’s a mile off last night, and expected her back soon, and
perhaps the uncle, who is a violent Secesh, with her. Said for us to
lay low. LATER.—The daughter came home on horseback and alone. Could
see the old lady telling the daughter about us and pointing our way.
About the middle of the afternoon the old lady started out toward
us. Behind her came a young darky, and behind the darky came another
darky; then a dog, then a white boy, then a darky, and then the
daughter. Old lady peeked in, and so did the rest except the grown-up
girl, who was too afraid. Finally came closer, and as she got a good
view of us she says: “Why, mother, they look just like anybody else.”
She had never seen a Yankee before. Brought us some more food, and
after dark will set a table for us to come to the house and eat. Her
name is Mrs. Dickinson. They went back to the house and we proceeded
to shake hands with one another. During the afternoon five rebel
soldiers came to the house, one at a time. It is now most dark and we
are about ready to go to the house and eat. Mr. Kimball lives only
four miles away.

Dec. 19.—We are now less than half a mile from Mr. Kimball’s. After
dark last night we went to Mrs. Dickinson’s house and partook of a
splendid supper. I wrote a paper directed to the officer commanding
the first Yankee troops that should arrive here telling what she had
done for us runaway Yankees. She talked a great deal, and I thought
was careless leaving the front door open. Three or four times I
got up and shut that door. We had taken off our blankets and other
wraps and left them in a sort of a kitchen, and were talking in the
best room. I heard the gate click, and on looking out saw two rebel
officers coming to the house and not six rods off. We jumped into the
other room and out of the back door and behind a corn house, bare
headed. The officers were asked into the front room by the daughter.
They asked who the parties were who ran out of the back way. She said
she reckoned no one. They kept at her and jokingly intimated that
some of her skulking lovers had been to see her. She kept talking
back and finally said: “Mother, did any one just go away?” And the
old lady said: “Why, yes, brother Sam and his ‘boy’ just went off
home.” Them confounded rebels had come to see the girl and spend the
evening, and we shivering out in the cold. Joked her for an hour and
a half about her lovers and we hearing every word. Finally they
got up and bid her good night, saying they would send back some men
to guard the house and keep her lovers away. Just as soon as they
were down the road a ways, the daughter came out very frightened and
said for us to hurry off, as they would send back troops to look for
us. Hurried into the house, got our things and some dried beef, and
started off toward Mr. Kimball’s house. Reached here just before
daylight and lay down back of the house about eighty rods, in the
corner of the fence, to sleep a little before morning. Just at break
of day heard some one calling hogs. David got up and went toward an
old man whom we knew was our friend Kimball. Came to us, and was glad
to shake hands with genuine Yankees. Said one of his neighbors was
coming over early to go with him to hunt some hogs, and for us to go
farther off and stay until night, and he would think up during the
day what to do with us. Did not want anything to eat. Came to this
place where we now are, and feeling that our journey was most ended.
Mr. Kimball said that Sherman was not over fifty miles off, and
coming right along twenty miles per day, and our plan was to hide and
await coming events. Mr. Kimball is an old man, probably sixty years
old, white haired and stoop shouldered. He had five sons, all drafted
into the rebel army. All refused to serve. Two have been shot by the
rebels, one is in some prison for his Union proclivities, and two are
refugees. The old man has been imprisoned time and again, his stock
confiscated, property destroyed, and all together had a hard time of
it. Still he is true blue, a Union man to the back bone. Really think
our troubles coming to an end. Kimball said: “Glory to God, the old
Stars and Stripes shall float over my house in less than a week!”
It’s a noble man who will stand out through all that he has, for his
principles, when his interests are all here. Is not only willing, but
glad to help us, and says anything he has is ours, if it will help us
toward our escape. LATER.—Have been laying all day watching Kimball’s
house. Along in the morning the neighbor spoken of came to Kimball’s,
and they both went off on horseback to shoot hogs. The swine here
roam over a large territory and become most wild, and when they want
fresh pork they have to go after it with a gun. You may be sure the
hunters did not come near us with Mr. Kimball for a guide. A negro
boy went with them with a light wagon and mule attached. Near noon
they returned with some killed hogs in the wagon. At three or four
o’clock the old man came down where we were “to look after his boys,”
he said. Is in the best of spirits. Says we are to hide to-night
where he tells us, and stay until our troops reach us. That is jolly
good news for me, as I hate to travel. Said come to the house after
dark and he would have a supper prepared for us, and has just left
us. LATER.—Have just eaten a splendid supper at Kimball’s and getting
ready to travel three miles to a safe hiding place.

Dec. 20.—Well, we are just well fixed and happy. After partaking
of a royal repast last night, served in an out-building near the
main building of the Kimball home, we were directed to this place
which is on the banks of the Big Ogechee river, in a most delightful
spot. While we were at Kimball’s he had negro sentinels stationed
at different points on the plantation to announce the coming of any
rebel soldiers or citizens that might see fit to come near. He gave
us an axe, a quart of salt, a ham too big to carry conveniently, and
all the sweet potatoes we could drag along; also a butcher knife.
Went with us a mile as guide and then told us so we found the place
pointed out. Also gave us some shelled corn to bait hogs and told
Dave how to make a deadfall to catch them. We left the main road
going directly West until we came to a fence, then turned to the left
and followed the line of the fence, and when we had got to the end of
it kept straight ahead going through a swampy low section. After a
while came to higher and dry land and to the banks of the river. Is a
sort of an island, and as I said before, a very pretty and pleasant
spot. Out in the river grows tall canebrake which effectually hides
us from any one going either up or down the river. Tall pines are
here in abundance and nice grass plats, with as handsome palm
clusters as ever I saw. Are going to build us a house to keep off the
cold and rain. Have matches and a rousing fire cooked our breakfast
of nice ham and sweet potatoes. We also roasted some corn and had
corn coffee. Any quantity of hogs running around and Dave is already
thinking of a trap to catch them. It will be necessary for we are
making that ham look sick. Eat so much breakfast that we can hardly
walk and don’t know but will commit suicide by eating. Buzzards
fly around attracted by the cooking. Are as large and look like
turkeys. Our government should give to Mr. Kimball a fortune for
his patriotism and sacrifices to the Union cause. About eight miles
above is a long bridge across the river and there it is thought a big
fight will take place when Sherman attempts to cross, and so we will
know when they approach, as we could hear a battle that distance.
NIGHT.—We have built the cosyest and nicest little house to lay in.
Cut poles with the axe and made a frame, and then covered the top
with palm leaves just like shingles on a house at the North, then
fixed three sides the same way, each leaf overlapping the other, and
the fourth side open to a fire and the river. The water is cold and
clear and nice to drink; just like spring water. Have eaten the ham
half up; ditto potatoes. The increased prosperity makes me feel well
bodily, and mentally am more so. It is still the “Astor House Mess.”
We all cook, and we all eat. Dave prays to-night as he does every
night and morning, and I ain’t sure but all through the day. Is a
thorough Christian if ever there was one. I also wrote a letter for
Mr. Kimball to the commanding Union officer who may first approach
these parts. In it I told how he had befriended us and others. We
heard boats going by on the river to-day. At such times all we do is
to keep still, as no one can see us. Rebels are too busy to look for
us or any one else. All they can do now to take care of themselves.
Eli is making up our bed, getting ready to turn in. I have just
brought a tin pail of nice water and we all drink. Take off our shoes
for the first time in some days. A beautiful night—clear and cold.
And thus ends another day, and we are in safety.

Dec. 21.—Got up bright and early. Never slept better. Getting rested
up. We talk continually. Both Bucks are great talkers, especially
David. Cooked and ate our breakfast, and would you believe it the
ham is all gone. Incredible, the amount of food we eat. Wonder it
don’t make us all sick. Sweet potatoes getting low. Dave fixing up
his deadfall for hogs. Has rolled some heavy logs together forty rods
away from our house, and fixed up a figure four spring trap, with
the logs for weight to hold down the animal which may be enticed
into it. Has scattered corn in and around the trap, and we wait
for developments. Hogs are very shy of us and surroundings. Are
apparently fat and in good order. Plenty of roots and shack which
they eat, and thrive thereon. Buzzards are very curious in regard to
us. They light on the limbs in the trees, and if their support is
a dead limb it breaks and makes a great noise in the still woods.
Two or three hundred all together make a terrible racket, and scare
us sometimes. The weather is very fine, and this must be a healthy
climate. Dave is going out to-day to look around. As I have said
before, he is a scout and understands spying around, and won’t get
caught. If we had a fish hook and line or a net of some sort could
catch fish to eat. That would be a grand sport as we can see nice
large fish in the water. The main road is away about one and a half
miles we think by the sound of the teams which occasionally rumble
along. Often hear shouting on the road as if cattle were being
driven along toward Savannah. Once in a while we hear guns fired
off, but it is no doubt hogs being killed. We also hear folks going
up and down the river, but cannot see them. After dark we have no
fire as that would expose us, it is so much plainer to be seen in
the night. The river is wide; should think a third of a mile, as
we can view it from away up the stream. The cane that grows in the
river is the same as we have for fish poles at the North, and are
shipped from the South. Have added some repairs to the house and it
is now water tight, we think. Made a bed of soft boughs, and with
our three blankets have a good sleeping place. Dave got a tall cane
and fastened up on the house, and for a flag fastened on a piece of
black cloth—the best we could do. That means no quarter; and it is
just about what we mean, too. Don’t believe we would be taken very
easy now. I am getting fat every day, yet lame, and have come to
the conclusion that it will be a long time before I get over it.
The cords have contracted so in my right leg that they don’t seem
to stretch out again to their original length. That scurvy business
came very near killing me. LATER.—I also went out of our hiding
place, and saw away out in a field what I took to be a mound where
sweet potatoes were buried. Came back and got a pair of drawers, tied
the bottom of the legs together, and sallied forth. The mound of
potatoes was a good way back from the house, although in plain sight.
I crawled up, and began digging into it with a piece of canteen.
Very soon had a hole in, and found some of the nicest potatoes
that you can imagine, of the red variety, which I believe are the
genuine Southern yam. Filled the drawers cram full, filled my pockets
and got all I could possibly carry, then closed up the hole and
worked my way back to camp. Eli was alone, Dave not having returned
from his scouting trip. Had a war dance around those potatoes.
Believe there is a bushel of them, and like to have killed myself
getting them here. After I got into the woods and out of the field,
straightened up and got the drawers on my shoulders and picked the
way to head-quarters. We don’t any of us call any such thing as that
stealing. It’s one of the necessities of our lives that we should
have food, and if we have not got it, must do the best we can. Now
if we can catch a porker will be fixed all right for some days to
come. Think it is about the time of year for butchering. We don’t
expect to be here more than two or three days at fartherest, although
I shall hate to leave this beautiful spot, our nice house and all.
Listen all the time for the expected battle at the bridge, and at any
unusual sound of commotion in that direction we are all excitement.
LATER.—Dave has returned. He went to the main road and saw a negro.
Was lucky enough to get a Savannah paper three days old in which
there was nothing we did not know in regard to Sherman’s coming. The
negro said yankee scouts had been seen just across the river near the
bridge, and the main army is expected every day. The rebels will fall
back across the river and contest the crossing. Fortifications are
built all along clear to Savannah, and it may be reasonably expected
that some hard fighting will take place. Savannah is the pride of
the South and they will not easily give it up. Dave did not tell the
negro that he was a yankee, but represented himself as a conscript
hiding in the woods to keep from fighting in the rebel army. Was glad
to see supply of potatoes and says I will do. Has freshly baited
his trap for hogs and thinks before night we will have fresh pork
to go with the potatoes. LATER.—We went around a drove of hogs and
gradually and carefully worked them up to the trap. Pretty soon they
began to pick up the corn and one of them went under the figure four,
sprung it and down came the logs and such a squealing and scrambling
of those not caught. The axe had been left near the trap standing up
against a tree, and Dave ran up and grabbed it and struck the animal
on the head and cut his throat. How we did laugh and dance around
that defunct porker. Exciting sport this trapping for fresh pork. In
half an hour Dave and Eli had the pig skinned and dressed. Is not a
large one probably weighs ninety pounds or so, and is fat and nice.
Have sliced up enough for about a dozen men and are now cooking it on
sticks held up before the fire. Also frying some in a skillet which
we are the possessor of. When the hogs run wild and eat acorns, roots
and the like, the meat is tough and curly but is sweet and good. We
fry out the grease and then slice up the potatoes and cook in it.
Thanks to Mr. Kimball we have plenty of salt to season our meat with.
The buzzards are after their share which will be small. And now it
is most night again and the “Astor House” larder is full. Seems too
bad to go to bed with anything to eat on hand, but must. That is the
feeling with men who have been starved so long, cannot rest in peace
with food laying around. My two comrades are not so bad about that as
I am, having been well fed for a longer period. Have sat up three or
four hours after dark, talking over what we will do when we get home,
and will now turn in for a sound sleep. It’s a clear moonlight night,
and we can hear very plain a long distance. Can also see the light
shining from camp fires in many directions, or what we take to be
such.

Dec. 22.—As Dan Rice used to say in the circus ring: “Here we are
again.” Sleep so sound that all the battles in America could not wake
me up. Are just going for that fresh pork to-day. Have three kinds of
meat—fried pig, roast pork and broiled hog. Good any way you can fix
it. Won’t last us three days at this rate, and if we stay long enough
will eat up all the hogs in these woods. Pretty hoggish on our part,
and Dave says for gracious sake not to write down how much we eat,
but as this diary is to be a record of what takes place, down it goes
how much we eat. Tell him that inasmuch as we have a preacher along
with us, we ought to have a sermon occasionally. Says he will preach
if I will sing, and I agree to that if Eli will take up a collection.
One objection Eli and I have to his prayers is the fact that he wants
the rebels saved with the rest, yet don’t tell him so. Mutually agree
that his prayers are that much too long. Asked him if he thought it
stealing to get those potatoes as I did, and he says no, and that he
will go next time. We begin to expect the Yankees along. It’s about
time. Don’t know what I shall do when I again see Union soldiers with
guns in their hands, and behold the Stars and Stripes. Probably go
crazy, or daft, or something. This is a cloudy, chilly day, and we
putter around gathering up pine knots for the fire, wash our duds and
otherwise busy ourselves. Have saved the hog skin to make moccasins
of, if the Union army is whipped and we have to stay here eight or
ten years. The hair on our heads is getting long again, and we begin
to look like wild men of the woods. One pocket comb does for the
entire party; two jack knives and a butcher knife. I have four keys
jingling away in my pocket to remind me of olden times. Eli has a
testament and Dave has a bible, and the writer hereof has not. Still,
I get scripture quoted at all hours, which will, perhaps, make up in
a measure. Am at liberty to use either one of their books, and I do
read more or less. Considerable travel on the highways, and going
both ways as near as we can judge. Dave wants to go out to the road
again but we discourage him in it, and he gives it up for to-day at
least. Are afraid he will get caught, and then our main stay will
be gone. Pitch pine knots make a great smoke which rises among the
trees and we are a little afraid of the consequences; still, rebels
have plenty to do now without looking us up. Many boats go up and
down the river and can hear them talk perhaps fifty rods away. Rebel
paper that Dave got spoke of Savannah being the point aimed at by
Sherman, also of his repulses; still I notice that he keeps coming
right along. Also quoted part of a speech by Jefferson Davis, and
he is criticised unmercifully. Says nothing about any exchange of
prisoners, and our old comrades are no doubt languishing in some
prison. LATER.—Considerable firing up in vicinity of the bridge. Can
hear volleys of musketry, and an occasional boom of cannon. Hurrah!
It is now four o’clock by the sun and the battle is certainly taking
place. LATER.—Go it Billy Sherman, we are listening and wishing
you the best of success. Come right along and we will be with you.
Give ’em another—that was a good one. We couldn’t be more excited
if we were right in the midst of it. Hurrah! It is now warm for
the Johnnies. If we had guns would go out and fight in their rear;
surround them, as it were. Troops going by to the front, and are
cavalry, should think, also artillery. Can hear teamsters swearing
away as they always do. LATER.—It is now long after dark and we have
a good fire. Fighting has partially subsided up the river, but of
course we don’t know whether Yankee troops have crossed the river
or not. Great deal of travel on the road, but can hardly tell which
way they are going. Occasional firing. No sleep for us to-night. In
the morning shall go out to the road and see how things look. Every
little while when the battle raged the loudest, all of us three would
hurrah as if mad, but we ain’t mad a bit; are tickled most to death.

[Illustration: (separator; small circular coastal scene)]




SAFE AND SOUND.

  ONCE MORE SEE THE OLD FLAG AND THE BOYS IN BLUE—MR. KIMBALL
  AND MRS. DICKINSON RECOMPENSED—FIND THE NINTH MICHIGAN
  CAVALRY—INTERVIEWED BY GEN’L KILPATRICK—ALL RIGHT AT LAST.


Dec. 23.—It is not yet daylight in the morning, and are anxiously
awaiting the hour to arrive when we may go out to the road. Slept
hardly any during the night. More or less fighting all night,
and could hear an army go by toward Savannah, also some shouting
directly opposite us. Between the hours of about twelve and three
all was quiet, and then again more travel. We conjecture that the
rebel army has retreated or been driven back, and that the Yankees
are now passing along following them up. Shall go out about nine
o’clock. LATER.—Are eating breakfast before starting out to liberty
and safety. Must be very careful now and make no mistake. If we
run into a rebel squad now, might get shot. We are nervous, and so
anxious can hardly eat. Will pick up what we really need and start.
Perhaps good bye, little house on the banks of the Ogechee, we shall
always remember just how you look, and what a happy time we have
had on this little island. Dave says: “Pick up your blanket and
that skillet, and come along.” NIGHT.—Safe and sound among our own
United States Army troops, after an imprisonment of nearly fourteen
months. Will not attempt to describe my feelings now. Could not do
it. Staying with the 80th Ohio Infantry, and are pretty well tired
out from our exertions of the day. At nine o’clock we started out
toward the main road. When near it Eli and I stopped, and Dave went
ahead to see who was passing. We waited probably fifteen minutes, and
then heard Dave yell out: “Come on boys, all right! Hurry up!” Eli
and I had a stream to cross on a log. The stream was some fifteen
feet wide, and the log about two feet through. I tried to walk that
log and fell in my excitement. Verily believe if the water had been
a foot deeper I would have drowned. Was up to my arms, and I was
so excited that I liked never to have got out. Lost the axe, which
Dave had handed to me, and the old stand-by coverlid which had saved
my life time and again floated off down the stream, and I went off
without securing it—the more shame to me for it. Dave ran out of
the woods swinging his arms and yelling like mad, and pretty soon
Eli and myself appeared, whooping and yelling. The 80th Ohio was
just going by, or a portion of it, however, and when they saw first
one and then another and then the third coming toward them in rebel
dress, with clubs which they mistook for guns, they wheeled into
line, thinking, perhaps, that a whole regiment would appear next.
Dave finally explained by signs, and we approached and satisfied
them of our genuineness. Said we were hard looking soldiers, but
when we came to tell them where we had been and all the particulars,
they did not wonder. Went right along with them, and at noon had
plenty to eat. Are the guests of Co. I, 80th Ohio. At three the
80th had a skirmish, we staying back a mile with some wagons, and
this afternoon rode in a wagon. Only came about three or four miles
to-day, and are near Kimball’s, whom we shall call and see the first
opportunity. The soldiers all look well and feel well, and say the
whole confederacy is about cleaned out. Rebels fall back without
much fighting. Said there was not enough to call it a fight at the
bridge. Where we thought it a battle, they thought it nothing worth
speaking of. Believe ten or so were killed, and some wounded. Hear
that some Michigan cavalry is with Kilpatrick off on another road,
but they do not know whether it is the 9th Mich. Cav., or not. Say
they see the cavalry every day nearly, and I must keep watch for my
regiment. Soldiers forage on the plantations, and have the best of
food; chickens, ducks, sweet potatoes, etc. The supply wagons carry
nothing but hard-tack, coffee, sugar and such things. Tell you,
coffee is a luxury, and makes one feel almost drunk. Officers come to
interview us every five minutes, and we have talked ourselves most
to death to-day. They say we probably will not be called upon to do
any fighting during this war, as the thing is about settled. They
have heard of Andersonville, and from the accounts of the place did
not suppose that any lived at all. New York papers had pictures in,
of the scenes there, and if such was the case it seems funny that
measures were not taken to get us away from there. Many rebels are
captured now, and we look at them from a different stand point than a
short time since.

Dec. 24.—This diary must soon come to an end. Will fill the few
remaining pages and then stop. Co. “I” boys are very kind. They have
reduced soldiering to a science. All divided up into messes of from
three to five each. Any mess is glad to have us in with them, and
we pay them with accounts of our prison life. Know they think half
we tell them is lies. I regret the most of anything, the loss of
my blanket that stood by me so well. It’s a singular fact that the
first day of my imprisonment it came into my possession, and the
very last day it took its departure, floating off away from me after
having performed its mission. Should like to have taken it North
to exhibit to my friends. The infantry move only a few miles each
day, and I believe we stay here all day. Went and saw Mr. Kimball.
The officers commanding knew him for a Union man, and none of his
belongings were troubled. In fact, he has anything he wants now.
Announces his intention of going with the army until the war closes.
Our good old friend Mrs. Dickinson did not fare so well. The soldiers
took everything she had on the place fit to eat; all her cattle,
pork, potatoes, chickens, and left them entirely destitute. We went
and saw them, and will go to head-quarters to see what can be done.
LATER.—We went to Gen. Smith, commanding 3d Brigade, 2d Division,
and told him the particulars. He sent out foraging wagons, and now
she has potatoes, corn, bacon, cattle, mules, and everything she
wants. Also received pay for burned fences and other damages. Now
they are smiling and happy and declare the Yankees to be as good
as she thought them bad this morning. The men being under little
restraint on this raid were often destructive. Nearly every citizen
declared their loyalty, so no distinction is made. Gen. Smith is a
very kind man, and asked us a great many questions. Says the 9th
Michigan Cavalry is near us and we may see them any hour. Gen. Haun
also takes quite an interest in us, and was equally instrumental with
Gen. Smith in seeing justice done to our friends the Kimballs and
Dickinsons. They declare now that one of us must marry the daughter
of Mrs. Dickinson, the chaplain performing the ceremony. Well, she is
a good girl, and I should judge would make a good wife, but presume
she would have something to say herself and will not pop the question
to her. They are very grateful, and only afraid that after we all
go away the rebel citizens and soldiers will retaliate on them.
Many officers have read portions of my diary, and say such scenes
as we have passed through seem incredible. Many inquire if we saw
so and so of their friends who went to Andersonville, but of course
there were so many there that we cannot remember them. This has been
comparatively a day of rest for this portion of the Union army, after
having successfully crossed the river. We hear the cavalry is doing
some fighting on the right, in the direction of Fort McAllister.
EVENING.—We marched about two or three miles and are again encamped
for the night, with pickets out for miles around. Many refugees join
the army prepared to go along with them, among whom are a great many
negroes.

Dec. 25.—Christmas day and didn’t hang up my stocking. No matter, it
wouldn’t have held anything. Last Christmas we spent on Belle Island,
little thinking long imprisonment awaiting us. Us escaped men are to
ride in a forage wagon. The army is getting ready to move. Are now
twenty-four miles from Savannah and rebels falling back as we press
ahead. NIGHT.—At about nine o’clock this morning as we sat in the
forage wagon top of some corn riding in state, I saw some cavalry
coming from the front. Soon recognized Col. Acker at the head of the
9th Michigan Cavalry. Jumped out of the wagon and began dancing and
yelling in the middle of the road and in front of the troop. Col.
Acker said: “Get out of the road you —— lunatic!” Soon made myself
known and was like one arisen from the dead. Major Brockway said:
“Ransom, you want to start for home. We don’t know you, you are dead.
No such man as Ransom on the rolls for ten months.” All remember me
and are rejoiced to see me back again. Lieut. Col. Way, Surgeon,
Adjutant, Sergeant-Major, all shake hands with me. My company “A”
was in the rear of the column, and I stood by the road as they moved
along, hailing those I recognized. In every case had to tell them who
I was and then would go up and shake hands with them at the risk of
getting stepped on by the horses. Pretty soon Co. “A” appeared, and
wasn’t they surprised to see me. The whole company were raised in
Jackson, Mich., my home, and I had been regarded as dead for nearly a
year. Could hardly believe it was myself that appeared to them. Every
one trying to tell me the news at home all at the same time—how I
was reported as having died in Richmond and funeral sermon preached.
How so and so had been shot and killed, &c., &c. And then I had to
tell them of who of our regiment had died in Andersonville—Dr. Lewis,
Tom McGill and others. Although Jimmy Devers did not belong to our
regiment, many in our company knew him, and I told them of his death.
Should have said that as soon as I got to the company, was given
Capt. Johnson’s lead horse to ride, without saddle or bridle and
nothing but a halter to hang on with. Not being used to riding, in
rebel dress—two or three pails hanging to me—I made a spectacle for
them all to laugh at. It was a time of rejoicing. The Buck boys did
not get out of the wagon with me and so we became separated without
even a good bye. Before I had been with the company half an hour Gen.
Kilpatrick and staff came riding by from the rear, and says to Capt.
Johnson: “Captain, I hear one of your company has just joined you
after escaping from the enemy.” Capt. Johnson said, “Yes, sir,” and
pointed to me as a Sergeant in his company. General Kilpatrick told
me to follow him and started ahead at a break neck pace. Inasmuch as
the highway was filled with troops, Gen. Kilpatrick and staff rode
at the side, through the fields, and any way they could get over the
ground. The horse I was on is a pacer and a very hard riding animal
and it was all I could do to hang on. Horse would jump over logs
and come down an all fours ker-chug, and I kept hoping the general
would stop pretty soon; but he didn’t. Having no saddle or anything
to guide the brute, it was a terrible hard ride for me, and time and
again if I had thought I could fall off without breaking my neck
should have done so. The soldiers all along the line laughed and
hooted at the spectacle and the staff had great sport, which was
anything but sport for me. After a while and after riding five or
six miles, Kilpatrick drew up in a grove by the side of the road and
motioning me to him, asked me when I escaped, etc. Soon saw I was too
tired and out of breath. After resting a few minutes I proceeded to
tell him what I knew of Savannah, the line of forts around the city,
and of other fortifications between us and the city, the location
of the rivers, force of rebels, etc. Asked a great many questions
and took down notes, or rather the chief of staff, Estes by name,
did. After an extended conversation a dispatch was made up and sent
to Gen. Sherman who was a few miles away, with the endorsement that
an escaped prisoner had given the information and it was reliable.
General Kilpatrick told me I would probably not be called upon to
do any more duty as I had done good service as a prisoner of war.
Said he would sign a furlough and recommend that I go home as soon as
communication was opened. Thanked me for information and dismissed me
with congratulations on my escape. Then I waited until our company,
“A,” came up and joined them, and here I am encamped with the boys,
who are engaged in getting supper. We are only twelve or fourteen
miles from Savannah and the report in camp is to the effect that
the city has been evacuated with no fight at all. Fort McAllister
was taken to-day, which being the key to Savannah, leaves that city
unprotected, hence the evacuation. Communication will now be opened
with the gunboats on the coast and I will be sent home to Michigan. I
mess with Capt. Johnson and there is peace and plenty among us. I go
around from mess to mess this pleasant night talking with the boys,
learning and telling the news. O. B. Driscoll, Al. Williams, Sergt.
Smith, Mell Strickland, Sergt. Fletcher, Teddy Fox, Lieut. Ingraham
and all the rest think of something new every few minutes, and I am
full. Poor Robt. Strickland, a boy whom I enlisted, was shot since
starting out on this march to the sea. Others too, whom I left well
are now no more. The boys have had a long and tedious march, yet are
all in good health and have enjoyed the trip. They never tire of
telling about their fights and skirmishes, and anecdotes concerning
Kilpatrick, who is well liked by all the soldiers. Am invited to eat
with every mess in the company, also at regimental head-quarters,
in fact, anywhere I am a mind to, can fill. And now this Diary is
finished and is full. Shall not write any more, though I hardly know
how I shall get along, without a self-imposed task of some kind.


END OF DIARY.

[Illustration: (decorative separator)]




THE FINIS.

  A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF WHAT BECAME OF THE BOYS—REFUSED PERMISSION
  TO GO HOME—A REFERENCE TO CAPT. WIRTZ—RETURN HOME AT THE END OF THE
  WAR.


It may interest some one to know more of many who have been mentioned
at different times in this book, and I will proceed to enlighten them.

George W. Hendryx came to the regiment in March, 1865, when we
were near Goldsboro, N. C. He says that after running away from
Andersonville at the time of the discovery of a break in which all
intended to get away in the summer of 1864, he traveled over one
hundred and fifty miles and was finally retaken by bushwhackers. He
represented himself as an officer of the 17th Michigan Infantry,
escaped from Columbia, S. C., and was sent to that place and put
with officers in the prison there, changing his name so as not to
be found out as having escaped from Andersonville. In due time he
was exchanged with a batch of other officers and went home North.
After a short time he joined his regiment and company for duty.
He was both delighted and surprised to see me, as he supposed of
course I had died in Andersonville, it having been so reported to
him at the North. He did valiant service until the war was over,
which soon happened. He went home with the regiment and was mustered
out of service, since when I have never seen or heard of him for a
certainty. Think that he went to California.

Sergt. Wm. B. Rowe was exchanged in March, 1865, but never joined
the regiment. His health was ruined to a certain extent from his long
confinement. Is still alive, however, and resides at Dansville, Mich.

Sergt. Bullock was also exchanged at the same time, but never did
service thereafter. He is now an inmate of a Michigan insane asylum,
and has been for some years, whether from the effects of prison life
I know not, but should presume it is due to his sufferings there. His
was a particularly sad case. He was taken sick in the early days of
Andersonville and was sick all the time while in that place, a mere
walking and talking skeleton. There is no doubt in my mind that his
insanity resulted from his long imprisonment.

E. P. Sanders arrived home in Michigan in April, 1865, and made me a
visit at Jackson that Summer. He was the only one of all my comrades
in prison that I came in contact with, who fully regained health,
or apparently was in good health. He was a particularly strong and
healthy man, and is now engaged in farming near Lansing, Michigan.

Lieut. Wm. H. Robinson, who was removed from Belle Isle, from our
mess, it having been discovered that he was an officer instead of an
orderly sergeant, was exchanged early in 1864, from Richmond, and
immediately joined his regiment, doing duty all the time thereafter.
Soon after my escape and while with company “A,” a note was handed
me from Capt. Robinson, my old friend, he having been promoted to a
captaincy. The note informed me that he was only a few miles away,
and asked me to come and see him that day. You may rest assured
I was soon on the road, and that day had the pleasure of taking
my dinner with him. He was on his general’s staff, and I dined at
head-quarters, much to my discomfiture, not being up with such
distinguished company. We had a good visit, I remember, and I went
to camp at night well satisfied with my ride. Told me that a pipe
which I engraved and presented to him on Belle Isle was still in his
possession, and always should be. Was a favorite with every one, and
a fine looking officer. He is now a resident of Sterling, Whiteside
Co., Ill. Is a banker, hardware dealer, one of the City Fathers, and
withal a prominent citizen. It was lucky he was an officer and taken
away from us on Belle Isle, for he would undoubtedly have died at
Andersonville, being of rather a delicate frame and constitution.

My good old friend Battese, I regret to say, I have never seen
or heard of since he last visited me in the Marine Hospital at
Savannah. Have written many letters and made many inquiries, but to
no effect. He was so reticent while with us in the prison, that we
did not learn enough of him to make inquiries since then effective.
Although for many months I was in his immediate presence, he said
nothing of where he lived, his circumstances, or anything else. I
only know that his name was Battese, that he belonged to a Minnesota
regiment and was a noble fellow. I don’t know of a man in the world
I would rather see to-day than him, and I hope some day when I have
got rich out of this book (if that time should ever come,) to go to
Minnesota and look him up. There are many Andersonville survivors who
must remember the tall Indian, and certainly I shall, as long as life
shall last.

Michael Hoare tells his own story farther along, in answer to a
letter written him for information regarding his escape from the
Savannah hospital. Mike, at the close of the war re-enlisted in the
regular army and went to the extreme west to fight Indians, and when
his term of service expired again re-enlisted and remained in the
service. In 1878 he was discharged on account of disability, and is
now an inmate of the Disabled Soldier’s Home, at Dayton, Ohio. From
his letters to me he seems the same jolly, good natured hero as of
old. I hope to see him before many months, for the first time since
he shook me by the hand and passed in and out of his tunnel from the
Marine Hospital and to freedom.

The two cousins Buck, David and Eli S., I last saw top of some corn
in an army wagon I jumped from when I first encountered the 9th Mich.
Cavalry. Little thought that would be the last time I should see
them. Their command belonged to the Eastern Army in the region of
the Potomac, and when communication was opened at Savannah they were
sent there on transports. I afterward received letters from both of
them, and David’s picture; also his wife’s whom he had just married.
David’s picture is reproduced in this book and I must say hardly does
him justice as he was a good looking and active fellow. Presume Eli
is a farmer if alive, and “Dave” probably preaching.

“Limber Jim,” who was instrumental in putting down the raiders at
Andersonville, was until recently a resident of Joliet, Illinois. He
died last winter, in 1880, and it is said his health was always poor
after his terrible summer of 1864. He was a hero in every sense of
the word, and if our government did not amply repay him for valiant
service done while a prisoner of war, then it is at fault.

Sergt. Winn of the 100th Ohio, who befriended me at Savannah, is, I
think, a citizen of Cincinnati, Ohio, and a prosperous man. Any way,
he was in 1870 or thereabouts. Was an upright man and good fellow.

Every one knows the fate of Capt. Wirtz, our prison commander at
Andersonville, who was hung at Washington, D. C., in 1866, for his
treatment of us Union prisoners of war. It was a righteous judgment,
still I think there are others who deserved hanging fully as much.
He was but the willing tool of those higher in command. Those who
put him there knew his brutal disposition, and should have suffered
the same disposition made of him. Although, I believe at this late
day those who were in command and authority over Capt. Wirtz have
successfully thrown the blame on his shoulders, it does not excuse
them in the least so far as I am concerned. They are just as much
to blame that thirteen thousand men died in a few months at that
worst place the world has ever seen, as Capt. Wirtz, and should have
suffered accordingly. I don’t blame any of them for being rebels if
they thought it right, but I do their inhuman treatment of prisoners
of war.

Hub Dakin is now a resident of Dansville, Mich., the same village in
which lives Wm. B. Rowe. He has been more or less disabled since the
war, and I believe is now trying to get a pension from the government
for disability contracted while in prison. It is very difficult
for ex-prisoners of war to get pensions, owing to the almost
impossibility of getting sufficient evidence. The existing pension
laws require that an officer of the service shall have knowledge
of the origin of disease, or else two comrades who may be enlisted
men. At this late day it is impossible to remember with accuracy
sufficient to come up to the requirements of the law. There is no
doubt that all were more or less disabled, and the mere fact of their
having spent the summer in Andersonville, should be evidence enough
to procure assistance from the government.

And now a closing chapter in regard to myself. As soon as Savannah
was occupied by our troops and communications opened with the North,
a furlough was made out by Capt. Johnson, of our company, and signed
by Assistant Surgeon Young, and then by Col. Acker. I then took the
furlough to Gen. Kilpatrick, which he signed, and also endorsed on
the back to the effect that he hoped Gen. Sherman would also sign
and send me North. From Gen. Kilpatrick’s head-quarters I went to
see Gen. Sherman at Savannah and was ushered into his presence. The
Gen. looked the paper over and then said no men were being sent home
now and no furloughs granted for any cause. If I was permanently
disabled I could be sent to Northern hospitals, or if I had been
an exchanged prisoner of war, could be sent North, but there was
no provision made for escaped prisoners of war. Encouraged me with
the hope, however, that the war was nearly over and it could not
be long before we would all go home. Gave me a paper releasing me
from all duty until such time as I saw fit to do duty, and said the
first furlough granted should be mine, and he would retain it and
send to me as soon as possible. Cannot say that I was very sadly
disappointed, as I was having a good time with the company, and
regaining my health and getting better every day, with the exception
of my leg, which still troubled me. Stayed with the company until Lee
surrendered, Lincoln assassinated and all the fighting over and then
leaving Chapel Hill, North Carolina, in April, went to my home in
Michigan. In a few weeks was followed by the regiment, when we were
all mustered out of the service. As had been reported to me at the
regiment, I had been regarded as dead, and funeral sermon preached.

It was my sad duty to call upon the relatives of quite a number who
died in Andersonville, among whom were those of Dr. Lewis, John
McGuire and Jimmy Devers. The relics which had been entrusted to my
keeping were all lost with two exceptions, and through no fault of
mine. At the time of my severe sickness when first taken to Savannah,
and when I was helpless as a child, the things drifted away from me
some way, and were lost. But for the fact that Battese had two of my
diary books and Sergt. Winn the other, they also would have been lost.

I hope that this Diary may prove successful in its mission of truly
portraying the scenes at Andersonville and elsewhere during the time
of my imprisonment, and if so, the object of its author shall have
been accomplished.

                            Yours Very Respectfully,

                                             JOHN L. RANSOM,

                                 Late 1st Sergt. Co. A, 9th Mich. Cav.


[Illustration: (decorative separator)]


[Illustration: John L. Ransom.

[From a photograph taken three months after escape.]]




MICHAEL HOARE’S ESCAPE


                                            NATIONAL SOLDIERS’ HOME. }
                                        DAYTON, Ohio, May 5th, 1881. }

_Comrade John L. Ransom_,

DEAR FRIEND:— * * * * The night I left the stockade, going within
twelve feet of a guard, I went down to the city. Had never been there
before and did not know where to go, but wandered about the streets,
dressed in an old suit of rebel clothes, until 12 o’clock that night.
It was Oct. 18th, 1864, and I had been captured March 5th, in Col.
Dahlgreen’s raid, the object of which was to release the officers
confined in Libby prison and the privates confined on Belle Island
and Pemberton prisons. * * * * My whole uniform was disposed of * * *
and I had to wear dirty rebel rags. They marched us to Stevensville.
We remained there but a short time when we were marched about two
miles and into the heart of a swamp. We did not know what the matter
was but found out that Kilpatrick had turned back to look for us, the
“forlorn hope,” as we were called. If he had been one hour sooner, he
would have released us; but fate would have it the other way. From
the swamp we were marched to Richmond, surrounded by the mounted
mob. They would not let us step out of the ranks even to quench our
thirst, and we had to drink the muddy water from the middle of the
road. Every little town we came to the rebels would assemble and yell
at us, the women the worst. * * * * When we reached the head-quarters
of rebeldom the whole rebel city was out to meet us * * * * and
the self-styled rebel ladies were the worst in their vim and foul
language. They made a rush for us, but the guard kept them off until
we were safely put in the third story of the Pemberton building,
where we were searched and stripped of everything we were not already
robbed of. * * * * The next morning the Richmond people cried out
for Jeff Davis to hang us, saying we were nothing but outlaws and
robbers, on an errand of plunder and rapine. The press tried to
excite hostility against us, and succeeded, in a measure. We were
kept by ourselves and not allowed to mix with the other prisoners. A
special guard was kept over us, and we were allowed but two-thirds
the small rations issued to the other men. The windows were all out
of the room we were in, and a cold March wind blowing and cutting
through our starving, naked bodies. * * * * In July we were going
to get hanged in Castle Thunder. We were told the same story every
day, and it was getting stale, so we paid no attention to it; but
sure enough, we were called out one morning and thought our time had
come. They marched us up Casey street toward Castle Thunder, and as
we approached it some fairly shivered at their promised doom; but
instead of stopping at that celebrated hotel, we were taken across
the river and put in cattle cars. Where we were going none knew; but
we started and the next day reached Dansville. We were removed from
the cars and put into a tobacco warehouse and were kept there until
the next morning, when we were put aboard the cars and started south
again until we came to the world renowned hell-hole, Andersonville.
When we arrived several men were dead in the cars, and the rebels
would not let us remove them. The cars were packed like herring
boxes, so you may imagine our situation. * * * * From there I was
transferred to Savannah, and from the latter place I made my escape,
as previously mentioned.

As I have said, I wandered about until 12 o’clock, and was then in
a worn out condition. Not knowing where to turn or lay my head, I
sat down under a tree to rest myself, and as I sat there, who should
come along but a watchman. “Hello!” says he, “what are you doing here
at this hour of the night?” I answered that I was one of the guards
guarding the Yankees at the stockade, and that I had been down to
Bryan street to see my sister. “All right,” said he, “You fellows
have a hard time guarding them d—d Yankees. Why don’t you shoot more
of ’em and get ’em out o’ the way?” I passed on until I came to a
place with a high board fence. I crawled over and looked around and
found a small shed divided by a board partition. In one end they kept
a cow and in the other some fodder. I went in where the fodder was
and threw myself down and went to sleep, intending to be up before
day; but what was my surprise when it proved to be broad daylight
before I awoke. I lay there thinking what to do, when I heard the
gate of the fence open. I jumped up and looked through a crack in the
boards and saw an old man enter with a pail in his hand. Presently
he came where I was in the fodder to get some for the cow. As he
opened the door he started back with fright, saying, “Who are you
and what brings you here?” I saw by his face and voice that he was
an Irishman, and I made up my mind to tell him the truth. * * * He
told me to remain where I was and he would try and get me something
to eat. He went away and presently returned with a tin pan full of
sweet potatoes and bacon. * * * * He told me the only way to get away
was by the Isle of Hope, ten miles from the city on the Skidaway
shell road. There was a picket post of twelve men right on the road,
but I started off, and when I reached the picket put on a bold face
and told them I belonged to Maxwell’s battery, stationed at the Isle
of Hope, and they let me pass. * * * I passed officers and soldiers
on the road, but they never took any notice of me further than to
return my kindly greeting. I finally reached the outpost on the road,
about a mile from freedom. I had known, even before starting, that to
pass that post I should have to have a pass signed by the commanding
officer at Savannah; but there were swamps on both sides the road,
and I thought I could swim in the marsh and flank the post. I took
off my jacket and made the attempt, but had to return to the road. *
* * * I saw there was no use trying to escape by the Isle of Hope. I
could not pass the outpost, and besides, there was great danger that
I should be hung as a spy. So I put back to Savannah that night. I
had to wade the marsh to get by the post I first passed. I got safely
back to my cowshed and laid there till woke up the next morning by
my friend Gleason. When I told him where I had been he would hardly
believe me. * * * * He brought me something to eat and went away,
but returned at night with two other men. Their names were Wall and
Skelley and they belonged to the 3d Georgia artillery. They said they
were northern men, but were in Savannah when the war broke out and
had to join the rebel army. I told them the history of my adventure
by the Isle of Hope and they were astonished. They said the only
way was by the river to Fort Pulaski, fourteen miles from Savannah.
The question was, where to get a boat. They were known in Savannah
and their movements would be watched. They said they knew where
there was a boat, but it was a government boat. I said that made it
better, and if they would show me where the boat was, I would do
the headwork. So they showed me and left me the management. I went
when everything was ready, and muffled the oars and oarlocks, with a
sentinel within twenty feet of me. The boat lay in the river, near
the gas-house and a government store-house, and the river was guarded
by gunboats and the floating battery, and paved with torpedoes;
but there is what is called “the back river,” which flows into the
Savannah above Smith Island. The mouth of this stream was guarded by
a picket crew, sent from the battery every night; so when we left
we had to lay in a rice sluice, where we ran the boat in about an
eighth of a mile, and raised the grass as the boat passed along to
conceal our tracks. We heard them searching the next morning, after
the boat had been missed, but the search was at last given up. About
this time Skelley began talking about being recaptured, as the shore
was picketed all the way. He said there would be nothing done with
me, if I was recaptured but to put me back in the stockade, while
he and Wall would be shot as deserters. He proposed returning to
Savannah at once. * * * * He began to win the other fellow over and I
saw the game was up with me. Skelley was the only one of us who was
armed and he had a Colt’s revolver. * * * * I told him that his plan
was the best and that I didn’t want to be the means of getting him
into trouble. I gained his confidence, but the thought of returning
to Savannah never entered my head. I watched my chance, and at a
favorable opportunity, snatched his pistol. * * * I rose to my feet
with the pistol at full cock, pointed it at his breast and told him
that one move towards returning to Savannah would end his career by a
bullet from his own revolver. He turned all colors, but said nothing.
I kept my distance, and at four o’clock in the afternoon told them
to get into the boat. I then sat down in the stern and told them to
pull out, which they did with a vim. Just as we passed the mouth, we
heard the click of oars on the picket boat; but they were too late,
and all the danger we had to encounter was the pickets on the shore
which we had to hug on account of torpedoes in the channel. I don’t
know how we ever passed safely over the torpedoes and by the pickets,
which latter were within forty yards of us all the way along until
we reached Pulaski. All that saved us was that the pickets had fires
lighted and were looking at them, and our oars and oarlocks being
muffled, they did not hear or see us. It was very dark when we struck
the mouth of the Savannah, and whereabouts Fort Pulaski lay we knew
not; but we kept pulling until halted by a soldier of the 144th N.
Y. Infantry, who was guarding the place at that time. We were ordered
to pull in, which we did, and were taken up to the commanding officer
and questioned. He said it was the most daring escape ever made,
up to that time, considering the obstacles we had to encounter. We
were kept in the guard house until my statement was confirmed by the
war department, when I was released and sent to Washington, where I
reported to the Adjutant-General who gave me a furlough and sent me
to the hospital. I remained there until spring, when I rejoined my
regiment and was mustered out at the close of the war. * * * * *

                                I remain,

                                       Your true friend,

                                                        MICHAEL HOARE.


[Illustration: (separator; small circular coastal scene)]




REBEL TESTIMONY.


We cannot do better than copy into this book a very complete
description of Andersonville Prison, by Joseph Jones, Surgeon P.
A. C. S., Professor of Medical Chemistry in the Medical College of
Georgia, at Augusta, Ga., as given at the Wirtz trial at Washington,
D. C., he being a witness for the prosecution:

  “Hearing of the unusual mortality among the prisoners confined
  at Andersonville, in the month of August, 1864, during a visit
  to Richmond, I expressed to the Surgeon General, S. P. Moore,
  Confederate States of America, a desire to visit Camp Sumpter, with
  the design of instituting a series of inquiries upon the nature and
  causes of the prevailing diseases. Small-pox had appeared among
  the prisoners, and I believed that this would prove an admirable
  field for the study of its characteristic lesions. The condition of
  Peyer’s glands in this disease was considered as worthy a minute
  investigation. It was believed that a large portion of the men from
  the Northern portion of the United States, suddenly transported
  to a Southern climate, and confined upon a small portion of land,
  would furnish an excellent field for the investigation of the
  relations of typhus, typhoid, and malarial fevers.

  The Surgeon General of the Confederate States of America furnished
  me with letters of introduction to the surgeon in charge of the
  Confederate States Military prison at Andersonville, Ga., and the
  following is my description of that place:

  The Confederate Military Prison at Andersonville, Ga., consists of
  a strong stockade, twenty feet in height, enclosing twenty-seven
  acres. The stockade is formed of strong pine logs, firmly planted
  in the ground. The main stockade is surrounded by two other
  similar rows of pine logs, the middle stockade being sixteen feet
  high, and the outer one twelve feet. These are intended for offense
  and defense. If the inner stockade should at any time be forced by
  the prisoners, the second forms another line of defense; while in
  case of an attempt to deliver the prisoners by a force operating
  upon the exterior, the outer line forms an admirable protection to
  the Confederate troops, and a most formidable obstacle to cavalry
  or infantry. The four angles of the outer line are strengthened
  by earthworks upon commanding eminences, from which the cannon,
  in case of an outbreak among the prisoners, may sweep the entire
  enclosure; and it was designed to connect these works by a line
  of rifle pits running zig-zag around the outer stockade; those
  rifle pits have never been completed. The ground enclosed by the
  innermost stockade lies in the form of a parallelogram, the larger
  diameter running almost due north and south. This space includes
  the northern and southern opposing sides of two hills, between
  which a stream of water runs from west to east. The surface soil of
  these two hills is composed chiefly of sand with varying mixtures
  of clay and oxide of iron. The clay is sufficiently tenacious
  to give a considerable degree of consistency to the soil. The
  internal structure of the hills, as revealed by the deep wells, is
  similar to that already described. The alternate layers of clay
  and sand, as well as the oxide of iron, which forms in its various
  combinations a cement to the sand, allows of extensive tunneling.
  The prisoners not only constructed numerous dirt houses with balls
  of clay and sand, taken from the wells which they had excavated
  all over these hills, but they have also, in some cases, tunneled
  extensively from these wells. The lower portion of these hills,
  bordering on the stream, are wet and boggy from the constant oozing
  of water. The stockade was built originally to accommodate ten
  thousand prisoners, and included at first seventeen acres. Near the
  close of the month of June the area was enlarged by the addition of
  ten acres. The ground added was situated on the northern slope of
  the largest hill.

  Within the circumscribed area of the stockade the Federal prisoners
  were compelled to perform all the functions of life, cooking,
  washing, the calls of nature, exercise, and sleeping. During the
  month of March the prison was less crowded than at any subsequent
  time, and then the average space of ground to each prisoner was
  only 98.7 feet or less than eleven square yards. The Federal
  prisoners were gathered from all parts of the Confederate States
  east of the Mississippi, and crowded into the confined space,
  until, in the month of June the average number of square feet of
  ground to each prisoner was only 32.3 or less than four square
  yards. These figures represent the stockade in a better light
  even than it really was; for a considerable breadth of land along
  the stream flowing from west to east between the hills was low
  and boggy, and was covered with the excrements of the men and
  thus rendered wholly uninhabitable, and in fact useless for every
  purpose except that of defaction. The pines and other small trees
  and shrubs, which originally were scattered sparsely over these
  hills were in a short time cut down by the prisoners for firewood,
  and no shade tree was left in the entire enclosure of the stockade.
  With their characteristic industry and ingenuity, the Federals
  constructed for themselves small huts and caves, and attempted to
  shield themselves from the rain and sun, and night damps and dew.
  But few tents were distributed to the prisoners, and those were
  in most cases torn and rotten. In the location and arrangement of
  these huts no order appears to have been followed; in fact, regular
  streets appear to be out of the question on so crowded an area;
  especially, too, as large bodies of prisoners were from time to
  time added suddenly and without any preparations. The irregular
  arrangement of the huts and imperfect shelters was very unfavorable
  for the maintenance of a proper system of police.

  The police and internal economy of the prison was left almost
  entirely in the hands of the prisoners themselves; the duties of
  the Confederate soldiers acting as guards being limited to the
  occupation of the boxes or lookouts ranged around the stockade
  at regular intervals, and to the manning of the batteries at the
  angles of the prison. Even judicial matters pertaining to the
  prisoners themselves, as the detection and punishment of such
  crimes as theft and murder appear to have been in a great measure
  abandoned to the prisoners.

  The large number of men confined within the stockade soon, under
  a defective system of police, and with imperfect arrangements,
  covered the surface of the low ground with excrements. The sinks
  over the lower portions of the stream were imperfect in their plan
  and structure, and the excrements were in large measure deposited
  so near the borders of the stream as not to be washed away, or
  else accumulated upon the low boggy ground. The volume of water
  was not sufficient to wash away the feces, and they accumulated in
  such quantities as to form a mass of liquid excrement. Heavy rains
  caused the water of the stream to rise and as the arrangements
  for the passage of the increased amount of water out of the
  stockade were insufficient, the liquid feces overflowed the low
  grounds and covered them several inches after the subsidence of
  the waters. The action of the sun upon this putrefying mass of
  excrements and fragments of bread and meat and bones excited most
  rapid fermentation and developed a horrible stench. Improvements
  were projected for the removal of the filth and for the prevention
  of its accumulation, but they were only partially and imperfectly
  carried out. As the forces of the prisoners were reduced by
  confinement, want of exercise, improper diet, and by scurvy,
  diarrhea, and dysentary, they were unable to evacuate their bowels
  within the stream or along its banks; and the excrements were
  deposited at the very doors of their tents. The vast majority
  appeared to lose all repulsion of filth, and both sick and well
  disregarded all the laws of hygiene and personal cleanliness. The
  accommodations for the sick were imperfect and insufficient. From
  the organization of the prison, February 24, 1864, to May 22, the
  sick were treated within the stockade. In the crowded condition of
  the stockade, and with the tents and huts clustered thickly around
  the hospital, it was impossible to secure proper ventilation or
  to maintain the necessary police. The Federal prisoners also made
  frequent forays upon the hospital stores and carried off the food
  and clothing of the sick. The hospital was, on the 22d of May,
  removed to its present site without the stockade, and five acres of
  ground covered with oaks and pines appropriated to the use of the
  sick.

  The supply of medical officers has been insufficient from the
  foundation of the prison.

  The nurses and attendants upon the sick have been most generally
  Federal prisoners, who in too many cases appear to have been devoid
  of moral principle, and who not only neglected their duties, but
  were also engaged in extensive robberies of the sick.

  From want of proper police and hygienic regulations alone it is
  not wonderful that from February 24 to September 21, 1864, nine
  thousand four hundred and seventy-nine deaths, nearly one-third the
  entire number of prisoners have been recorded.

  At the time of my visit to Andersonville a large number of Federal
  prisoners had been removed to Millen, Savannah, Charleston, and
  other parts of the Confederacy, in anticipation of an advance
  of General Sherman’s forces from Atlanta, with the design of
  liberating their captive bretheren; however, about fifteen thousand
  prisoners remained confined within the limits of the stockade and
  prison hospital.

  In the stockade, with the exception of the damp lowlands bordering
  the small stream, the surface was covered with huts, and small
  ragged tents and parts of blankets and fragments of oil-cloth,
  coats, and blankets stretched upon sticks. The tents and huts were
  not arranged according to any order, and there was in most parts of
  the enclosure scarcely room for two men to walk abreast between the
  tents and huts.

  If one might judge from the large pieces of corn bread scattered
  about in every direction on the ground the prisoners were either
  very lavishly supplied with this article of diet, or else this kind
  of food was not relished by them.

  Each day the dead from the stockade were carried out by their
  fellow prisoners and deposited upon the ground under a bush arbor,
  just outside of the southwestern gate. From thence they were
  carried on carts to the burying ground, one-quarter of a mile
  northwest of the prison. The dead were buried without coffins, side
  by side, in trenches four feet deep.

  The low grounds bordering the stream were covered with human
  excrements and filth of all kinds, which in many places seemed to
  be alive with working maggots. An indescribable sickening stench
  arose from these fermenting masses of human filth.

  There were near five thousand seriously ill Federals in the
  stockade and the Confederate States Military Prison Hospital, and
  the deaths exceeded one hundred per day, and large numbers of the
  prisoners who were walking about, and who had not been entered upon
  the sick reports, were suffering incurable diarrhea, dysentery,
  and scurvy. The sick were attended almost entirely by their fellow
  prisoners, appointed as nurses, and as they received but little
  attention, they were compelled to exert themselves at all times
  to attend the calls of nature, and hence they retain the power of
  moving about to within a comparatively short period of the close of
  life. Owing to the slow progress of the diseases most prevalent,
  diarrhea and chronic dysentery, the corpses were as a general rule
  emaciated.

  I visited two thousand sick within the stockade, laying under
  some long sheds which had been built at the northern portion
  for themselves. At this time only one medical officer was in
  attendance, whereas at least twenty medical officers should have
  been employed.

  Scurvy, diarrhea, dysentary, and hospital gangrene were the
  prevailing diseases. I was surprised to find but few cases of
  malarial fever, and no well-marked cases either of typhus or
  typhoid fever. The absence of the different forms of malarial
  fever may be accounted for in the supposition that the artificial
  atmosphere of the stockade, crowded densely with human beings and
  loaded with animal exhalations, was unfavorable to the existence
  and action of the malarial poison. The absence of typhoid and
  typhus fevers amongst all the causes which are known to generate
  these diseases, appeared to be due to the fact that the great
  majority of these prisoners had been in captivity in Virginia,
  at Belle Isle, and in other parts of the Confederacy for months,
  and even as long as two years, and during this time they had been
  subjected to the same bad influences, and those who had not had
  these fevers before either had them during their confinement in
  Confederate prisons or else their systems, from long exposure, were
  proof against their action.

  The effects of scurvy were manifest on every hand, and in all its
  various stages, from the muddy pale complexion, pale gums, feeble,
  languid muscular motions, lowness of spirits, and fetid breath,
  to the dusky, dirty, leaden complexion, swollen features, spongy,
  purple, livid, fungoid, bleeding gums, loose teeth, œdematous
  limbs, covered with livid vibices, and petechiæ spasmodically
  flexed, painful and hardened extremities, spontaneous hemorrhages
  from mucous canals, and large, ill-conditioned, spreading ulcers
  covered with a dark purplish fungus growth. I observed that in some
  of the cases of scurvy the parotid glands were greatly swollen, and
  in some instances to such an extent as to preclude entirely the
  power to articulate. In several cases of dropsy the abdomen and
  lower extremities supervening upon scurvy, the patients affirmed
  that previously to the appearance of the dropsy they had suffered
  with profuse and obstinate diarrhea, and that when this was checked
  by a change of diet, from Indian corn-bread baked with the husk,
  to boiled rice, the dropsy disappeared. The severe pains and livid
  patches were frequently associated with swellings in various parts,
  and especially in the lower extremities, accompanied with stiffness
  and contractions of the knee joints and ankles, and often with a
  brawny feel of those parts, as if lymph had been effused between
  the integuments and apeneuroses, preventing the motion of the skin
  over the swollen parts. Many of the prisoners believed that scurvy
  was contagious, and I saw men guarding their wells and springs,
  fearing lest some man suffering with scurvy might use the water
  and thus poison them. I observed also numerous cases of hospital
  gangrene, and of spreading scorbutic ulcers, which had supervened
  upon slight injuries. The scorbutic ulcers presented a dark, purple
  fungoid, elevated surface, with livid swollen edges, and exuded
  a thin, fetid, sanious fluid, instead of pus. Many ulcers which
  originated from the scorbutic condition of the system appeared
  to become truly gangrenous, assuming all the characteristics of
  hospital gangrene. From the crowded condition, filthy habits, bad
  diet, and dejected, depressed condition of the prisoners, their
  systems had become so disordered that the smallest abration of the
  skin, from the rubbing of a shoe, or from the effects of the sun,
  or from the prick of a splinter, or from scratching, or a musquito
  bite, in some cases, took on a rapid and frightful ulceration and
  gangrene. The long use of salt meat, oft-times imperfectly cured,
  as well as the most total deprivation of vegetables and fruit,
  appeared to be the chief causes of the scurvy. I carefully examined
  the bakery and the bread furnished the prisoners, and found that
  they were supplied almost entirely with corn-bread from which the
  husk had not been separated. This husk acted as an irritant to the
  alimentary canal, without adding any nutriment to the bran. As far
  as my examination extended no fault could be found with the mode
  in which the bread was baked; the difficulty lay in the failure
  to separate the husk from the corn-meal. I strongly urged the
  preparation of large quantities of soup from the cow and calves’
  heads, with the brains and tongues, to which a liberal supply of
  sweet potatoes and vegetables might have been advantageously added.
  The material existed in abundance for the preparation of such
  soup in large quantities with but little additional expense. Such
  aliment would have been not only highly nutricious, but it would
  also have acted as an efficient remedial agent for the removal of
  the scorbutic condition. The sick within the stockade lay under
  several long sheds which were originally built for barracks. These
  sheds covered two floors which were open on all sides. The sick
  lay upon the bare boards, or upon such ragged blankets as they
  possessed, without, as far as I observed, any bedding or even straw.

  The haggard, distressed countenances of these miserable,
  complaining, dejected, living skeletons, crying for medical aid
  and food, and cursing their government for its refusal to exchange
  prisoners, and the ghastly corpses, with their glazed eye balls
  staring up into vacant space, with the flies swarming down their
  open and grinning mouths and over their ragged clothes, infested
  with lice, as they lay amongst the sick and dying, formed a picture
  of helpless, hopeless misery which it would be impossible to
  portray by words or by the brush. A feeling of disappointment and
  even resentment on account of the United States Government upon the
  subject of the exchange of prisoners, appeared to be widespread,
  and the apparent hopeless nature of the negotiations for some
  general exchange of prisoners appeared to be a cause of universal
  regret and injurious despondency. I heard some of the prisoners go
  so far as to exonerate the Confederate Government from any charge
  of intentionally subjecting them to a protracted confinement, with
  its necessary and unavoidable sufferings, in a country cut off
  from all intercourse with foreign nations, and sorely pressed on
  all sides, whilst on the other hand they charged their prolonged
  captivity upon their own government, which was attempting to
  make the negro equal to the white man. Some hundred or more of
  the prisoners had been released from confinement in the stockade
  on parole, and filled various offices as druggists, clerks,
  carpenters, etc., in the various departments. These men were well
  clothed, and presented a stout and healthy appearance, and as a
  general rule they presented a more robust and healthy appearance
  than the Confederate troops guarding the prisoners.

  The entire grounds are surrounded by a frail board fence, and are
  strictly guarded by Confederate soldiers, and no prisoner except
  the paroled attendants is allowed to leave the grounds except by a
  special permit from the commandant of the interior of the prison.

  The patients and attendants, near two thousand in number, are
  crowded into this confined space and are but poorly supplied with
  old and ragged tents. Large numbers of them were without any
  bunks in their tents, and lay upon the ground, oft-times without
  even a blanket. No beds or straw appeared to have been furnished.
  The tents extend to within a few yards of the small stream, the
  eastern portion of which, as we have before said, is used as a
  privy and is loaded with excrements; and I observed a large pile of
  corn-bread, bones, and filth of all kinds, thirty feet in diameter
  and several feet high, swarming with myriads of flies, in a vacant
  space near the pots used for cooking. Millions of flies swarmed
  over everything, and covered the faces of the sleeping patients,
  and crawled down their open mouths, and deposited their maggots
  in the gangrenous wounds of the living, and in the mouths of the
  dead. Musquetos in great numbers also infest the tents, and many of
  the patients were so stung by these pestiferous insects, that they
  resembled those suffering from a slight attack of the measles.

  The police hygiene of the hospital were defective in the extreme;
  the attendants, who appeared in almost every instance to have
  been selected from the prisoners, seemed to have in many cases
  but little interest in the welfare of their fellow-captives. The
  accusation was made that the nurses in many cases robbed the sick
  of their clothing, money, and rations, and carried on a clandestine
  trade with the paroled prisoners and Confederate guards without
  the hospital enclosure, in the clothing, effects of the sick,
  dying, and dead Federals. They certainly appeared to neglect the
  comfort and cleanliness of the sick entrusted to their care in a
  most shameful manner, even after making due allowances for the
  difficulties of the situation. Many of the sick were literally
  encrusted with dirt and filth and covered with vermin. When a
  gangrenous wound needed washing, the limb was thrust out a little
  from the blanket, or board, or rags upon which the patient was
  lying, and water poured over it, and all the putrescent matter
  allowed to soak into the ground floor of the tent. The supply
  of rags for dressing wounds was said to be very scant, and I
  saw the most filthy rags which had been applied several times
  and imperfectly washed, used in dressing wounds. Where hospital
  gangrene was prevailing, it was impossible for any wound to
  escape contagion under these circumstances. The results of the
  treatment of wounds in the hospital were of the most unsatisfactory
  character, from this neglect of cleanliness, in the dressings and
  wounds themselves, as well as from various other causes which will
  be more fully considered. I saw several gangrenous wounds filled
  with maggots. I have frequently seen neglected wounds amongst
  the Confederate soldiers similarly affected; and as far as my
  experience extends, these worms destroy only the dead tissues and
  do not injure specially the well parts. I have even heard surgeons
  affirm that a gangrenous wound which had been thoroughly cleansed
  by maggots, healed more rapidly than if it had been left to itself.
  This want of cleanliness on the part of the nurses appeared to
  be the result of carelessness and inattention, rather than of
  malignant design, and the whole trouble can be traced to the want
  of the proper police and sanitary regulations, and to the absence
  of intelligent organization and division of labor. The abuses were
  in a large measure due to the almost total absence of system,
  government, and rigid, but wholesome sanitary regulations. In
  extenuation of these abuses it was alleged by the medical officers
  that the Confederate troops were barely sufficient to guard the
  prisoners, and that it was impossible to obtain any number of
  experienced nurses from the Confederate forces. In fact, the guard
  appeared to be too small, even for the regulation of the internal
  hygiene and police of the hospital.

  The manner of disposing of the dead was also calculated to depress
  the already desponding spirits of these men, many of whom have been
  confined for months, and even for two years in Richmond and other
  places, and whose strength had been wasted by bad air, bad food,
  and neglect of personal cleanliness. The dead-house is merely a
  frame covered with old tent cloth and a few bushes, situated in the
  southwestern corner of the hospital grounds. When a patient dies,
  he is simply laid in the narrow street in front of his tent, until
  he is removed by Federal negroes detailed to carry off the dead; if
  a patient dies during the night, he lies there until the morning,
  and during the day even the dead were frequently allowed to remain
  for hours in these walks. In the dead-house the corpses lie upon
  the bare ground, and were in most cases covered with filth and
  vermin.

  The cooking arrangements are of the most defective character. Five
  large iron pots similar to those used for boiling sugar cane,
  appeared to be the only cooking utensils furnished the hospital for
  the cooking of two thousand men; and the patients were dependent
  in a great measure upon their own miserable utensils. They were
  allowed to cook in the tent doors and in the lanes, and this was
  another source of filth, and another favorable condition for the
  generation and multiplication of flies and other vermin.

  The air of the tents was foul and disagreeable in the extreme, and
  in fact the entire grounds emitted a most nauseous and disgusting
  smell. I entered nearly all the tents and carefully examined the
  cases of interest, and especially the cases of gangrene, upon
  numerous occasions, during the prosecution of my pathological
  inquiries at Andersonville, and therefore enjoyed every opportunity
  to judge correctly of the hygiene and police of the hospital.

  There appeared to be almost absolute indifference and neglect of
  the part of the patient, of personal cleanliness; their persons
  and clothing in most instances, and especially those suffering
  with gangrene and scorbutic ulcers, were filthy in the extreme and
  covered with vermin. It was too often the case that the patients
  were received from the stockade in a most deplorable condition. I
  have seen men brought in from the stockade in a dying condition,
  begrimmed from head to foot with their own excrements, and so black
  from smoke and filth that they resembled negroes rather than white
  men. That this description of the stockade has not been overdrawn,
  will appear from the reports of the surgeon in charge.

  We will first examine the consolidated report of the sick and
  wounded Federal prisoners. During six months, from the 1st of
  March to the 31st of August, forty-two thousand six hundred
  and eighty-six cases of sickness and wounds were reported. No
  classified record of the sick in the stockade was kept after the
  establishment of the hospital without the prison. This fact,
  in conjunction with those already presented relating to the
  insufficiency of medical officers and the extreme illness and even
  death of many prisoners in the tents in the stockade, without any
  medical attention or record beyond the bare number of the dead,
  demonstrates that these figures, large as they seem to be, are far
  below the truth.

  As the number of prisoners varied greatly at different periods, the
  relations between those reported sick and well, as far as those
  statistics extend, can best be determined by a comparison of the
  statistics of each month.

  During this period of six months no less than five hundred and
  sixty-five deaths are recorded under the head of morbi vanie. In
  other words, those men died without having received sufficient
  medical attention for the determination of even the name of the
  disease causing death.

  During the month of August fifty-three cases and fifty-three deaths
  are recorded as due to marasmus. Surely this large number of deaths
  must have been due to some other morbid state than slow wasting.
  If they were due to improper and insufficient food, they should
  have been classed accordingly, and if to diarrhea or dysentary or
  scurvy, the classification in like manner should have been explicit.

  We observe a progressive increase of the rate of mortality, from
  3.11 per cent. in March to 9.09 per cent. of mean strength, sick
  and well, in August. The ratio of mortality continued to increase
  during September, for notwithstanding the removal of one-half the
  entire number of prisoners during the early portion of the month,
  one thousand seven hundred and sixty-seven (1,767) deaths are
  registered from September 1 to 21, and the largest number of deaths
  upon any one day occurred during this month, on the 16th, viz: one
  hundred and nineteen.

  The entire number of Federal prisoners confined at Andersonville
  was about forty thousand six hundred and eleven; and during the
  period of near seven months, from February 24 to September 21,
  nine thousand four hundred and seventy-nine (9,479) deaths were
  recorded; that is, during this period near one-fourth, or more,
  exactly one in 4.2, or 23.3 per cent. terminated fatally. This
  increase of mortality was due in great measure to the accumulation
  of the sources of disease, as the increase of excrements and filth
  of all kinds, and the concentration of noxious effluvia, and also
  to the progressive effects of salt diet, crowding, and the hot
  climate.


  CONCLUSIONS.

  1st. The great mortality among the Federal prisoners confined in
  the military prison at Andersonville was not referable to climatic
  causes, or to the nature of the soil and waters.

  2d. The chief causes of death were scurvy and its results and bowel
  affections—chronic and acute diarrhea and dysentery. The bowel
  affections appear to have been due to the diet, and the habits of
  the patients, the depressed, dejected state of the nervous system
  and moral and intellectual powers, and to the effluvia arising from
  the decomposing animal and vegetable filth. The effects of salt
  meat, and the unvarying diet of corn-meal, with but few vegetables,
  and imperfect supplies of vinegar and sirup, were manifested in the
  great prevalence of scurvy. This disease, without doubt, was also
  influenced to an important extent in its origin and course by the
  foul animal emanations.

  3d. From the sameness of the food and form, the action of the
  poisonous gasses in the densely crowded and filthy stockade and
  hospital, the blood was altered in its constitution, even before
  the manifestation of actual disease. In both the well and the
  sick the red corpuscles were diminished; and in all diseases
  uncomplicated with inflammation, the fibrous element was deficient.
  In cases of ulceration of the mucous membrane of the intestinal
  canal, the fibrous element of the blood was increased; while in
  simple diarrhea, uncomplicated with ulceration, it was either
  diminished or else remained stationary. Heart clots were very
  common, if not universally present in cases of ulceration of the
  intestinal mucous membrane, while in the uncomplicated cases of
  diarrhea and scurvy, the blood was fluid and did not coagulate
  readily, and the heart clots and fibrous concretions were almost
  universally absent. From the watery condition of the blood, there
  resulted various serous effusions into the pericardium, ventricles
  of the brain, and into the abdomen. In almost all the cases which
  I examined after death, even the most emaciated, there were more
  or less serous effusions into the abdominal cavity. In case of
  hospital gangrene of the extremities, and in case of gangrene of
  the intestines, heart clots and fibrous coagula were universally
  present. The presence of these clots in the cases of hospital
  gangrene, while they were absent in the cases in which there were
  no inflammatory symptoms, sustains the conclusion that hospital
  gangrene is a species of inflammation, imperfect and irregular
  though it may be in its progress, in which the fibrous element
  and coagulation of the blood are increased, even in those who
  are suffering from such a condition of the blood, and from such
  diseases as are naturally accompanied with a disease in the fibrous
  constituent.

  4th. The fact that hospital gangrene appeared in the stockade
  first, and originated spontaneously without any previous contagion,
  and occurred sporadically all over the stockade and prison
  hospital, was proof positive that this disease will arise whenever
  the conditions of crowding, filth, foul air, and bad diet are
  present. The exhalations of the hospital and stockade appeared to
  exert their effects to a considerable distance outside of these
  localities. The origin of hospital gangrene among the prisoners
  appeared clearly to depend in great measure to the state of the
  general system induced by diet, and various external noxious
  influences. The rapidity of the appearance and action of the
  gangrene depended upon the powers and state of the constitution, as
  well as upon the intensity of the poison in the atmosphere, or upon
  the direct application of poisonous matter to the wounded surface.
  This was further illustrated by the important fact that hospital
  gangrene, or a disease resembling it in all essential respects,
  attacked the intestinal canal of patients laboring under ulceration
  of the bowels, although there were no local manifestations of
  gangrene upon the surface of the body. This mode of termination in
  case of dysentery was quite common in the foul atmosphere of the
  Confederate States Military Hospital, in the depressed, depraved
  condition of the system of these Federal prisoners.

  5th. A scorbutic condition of the system appeared to favor the
  origin of foul ulcers, which frequently took on true hospital
  gangrene. Scurvy and hospital gangrene frequently existed in the
  same individual. In such cases vegetable diet, with vegetable
  acids would remove the scorbutic condition without curing the
  hospital gangrene. From the results of the existing war for the
  establishment of the independence of the Confederate States,
  as well as from the published observations of Dr. Trotter, Sir
  Gilbert Blane, and others of the English navy and army, it is
  evident that the scorbutic condition of the system, especially
  in crowded ships and camps, is most favorable to the origin and
  spread of foul ulcers and hospital gangrene. As in the present
  case of Andersonville, so also in past times when medical hygiene
  was almost entirely neglected, those two diseases were almost
  universally associated in crowded ships. In many cases it was very
  difficult to decide at first whether the ulcer was a simple result
  of scurvy or the action of the prison or hospital gangene, for
  there was great similarity in the appearance of the ulcers in the
  two diseases. So commonly have those two diseases been confined to
  their origin and action, that the description of scorbutic ulsers,
  by many authors, evidently includes also many of the prominent
  characteristics of hospital gangrene. This will be rendered evident
  by an examination of the observations of Dr. Lind and Sir Gilbert
  Blane upon scorbutic ulcers.

  6th. Gangrenous spots followed by rapid destruction of the tissue
  appeared in some cases where there has been no known wound. Without
  such well established facts, it might be assumed that the disease
  was propagated from one patient to another. In such a filthy
  and crowded hospital as that of the Confederate States Military
  Prison at Andersonville, it was impossible to isolate the wounded
  from the sources of actual contact with gangrenous matter. The
  flies swarmed over the wounds and over filth of every kind, the
  filthy, imperfectly washed and scanty supplies of rags, and the
  limited supply of washing utensils, the same wash-bowl serving for
  scores of patients were sources of such constant circulation of
  the gangrenous matter that the disease might rapidly spread from
  a single gangrenous wound. The fact already stated, that a form
  of moist gangrene, resembling hospital gangrene, was quite common
  in this foul atmosphere, in cases of dysentery, both with and
  without the existance of the entire service, not only demonstrates
  the dependence of the disease upon the state of the constitution,
  but proves in the clearest manner that neither the contact of
  the poisonous matter of gangrene, nor the direst action of the
  poisonous atmosphere upon the ulcerated surface are necessary to
  the development of the disease.

  7th. In this foul atmosphere amputation did not arrest hospital
  gangrene; the disease almost universally returned. Almost every
  amputation was followed finally by death, either from the effects
  of gangrene or from the prevailing diarrhea and dysentery. Nitric
  acid and escharoties generally in this crowded atmosphere, loaded
  with noxious effluvia, exerted only temporary effects; after their
  application to the diseased surfaces, the gangrene would frequently
  returned with redoubled energy; and even after the gangrene had
  been completely removed by local and constitutional treatment,
  it would frequently return and destroy the patient. As far as my
  observation extended, very few of the cases of amputation for
  gangrene recovered. The progress of these cases was frequently
  very deceptive. I have observed after death the most extensive
  disorganization of the stump, when during life there was but little
  swelling of the part, and the patient was apparently doing well. I
  endeavored to impress upon the medical officers the view that on
  this disease treatment was almost useless, without an abundance of
  pure, fresh air, nutricious food, and tonics and stimulants. Such
  changes, however, as would allow of the isolation of the cases of
  hospital gangrene appeared to be out of the power of the medical
  officers.

  8th. The gangrenous mass was without true puss, and consisted
  chiefly of broken-down, disorganized structures. The reaction of
  the gangrenous matter in certain stages was alkaline.

  9th. The best, and in truth the only means of protecting large
  armies and navies, as well as prisoners, from the ravages of
  hospital gangrene, is to furnish liberal supplies of well-cured
  meat, together with fresh beef and vegetables, and to enforce a
  rigid system of hygene.

  10th. Finally, this gigantic mass of human misery calls loudly
  for relief, not only for the sake of suffering humanity, but also
  on account of our own brave soldiers now captive in the hands of
  the Federal Government. Strict justice to the gallant men of the
  Confederate armies, who have been or who may be, so unfortunate
  as to be compelled to surrender in battle, demands that the
  Confederate Government should adopt that course which will best
  secure their health and comfort in captivity; or at least leave
  their enemies without a shadow of an excuse for any violation of
  the rules of civilized warfare in the treatment of prisoners.”

(END OF WITNESS’S TESTIMONY.)


[Illustration: (decorative separator)]




SUMMARY


The variation—from month to month—of the proportion of deaths to the
whole number of living is singular and interesting. It supports the
theory I have advanced above, as the following facts taken from the
official report, will show:

  In April one in every sixteen died.
  In May one in every twenty-six died.
  In June one in every twenty-two died.
  In July one in every eighteen died.
  In August one in eleven died.
  In September one in every three died.
  In October one in every two died.
  In November one in every three died.

Does the reader fully understand that in September one-third of those
in the pen died, that in October one-half of the remainder perished,
and in November one-third of those who still survived, died? Let him
pause for a moment and read this over carefully again, because its
startling magnitude will hardly dawn upon him at first reading. It
is true that the fearful disproportionate mortality of those months
was largely due to the fact that it was mostly the sick that remained
behind, but even this diminishes but little the frightfulness of the
showing. Did anyone ever hear of an epidemic so fatal that one-third
of those attacked by it in one month died; one-half of the remnant
the next month, and one-third of the feeble remainder the next month?
If he did his reading has been much more extensive than mine.


[Illustration: (separator; small circular coastal scene)]




THE WAR’S DEAD.


The total number of deceased Union soldiers during and in consequence
of the war, is 316,233. Of these, only 175,764 have been identified,
and the rest will probably remain for ever unknown. Of the grand
total, 36,868 are known to have been prisoners of war who died in
captivity. There are seventy-two National Cemeteries for the dead
of the Union armies, besides which there are 320 local and Post
cemeteries. The largest of the Government grounds are: Arlington,
Va., the former homestead of General Robert E. Lee, 15,547 graves;
Fredericksburg, Va., 15,300 graves; Salisbury, N. C., 12,112 graves;
Beaufort, S. C., 10,000 graves; Andersonville, Ga., 13,706 graves;
Marietta, Ga., 10,000 graves; New Orleans, La., 12,230 graves;
Vicksburg, Miss., 17,012 graves; Chattanooga, Tenn., 12,964 graves;
Nashville, Tenn., 16,529 graves; Memphis, Tenn., 13,958 graves;
Jefferson Barracks, near St. Louis, Mo., 8,601 graves. The National
Cemetery near Richmond, Va. contains 6,276 graves, of which 5,450 are
of unknown dead, mostly prisoners of war. The cemeteries are kept
in good condition, and are generally well sodded and planted with
ornamental trees.




EX-PRISONERS AND PENSIONERS.


The following is an Appeal to Congress in behalf of the ex-prisoners
of war, issued by Felix LaBaume, President of the “National
Ex-Prisoners of War Association,” and I hope that the united efforts
of every one of the survivors will be concentrated with an object in
view which shall substantially benefit those who performed a most
valuable service in putting down the rebellion, suffering horrors and
privations that cannot fully be described, and for which privations
and sufferings they have never been recognized in the existing
pension laws.


APPEAL TO CONGRESS.

  It is a historical fact that in the early part of 1864, shortly
  after the battles of the wilderness, certain high officials of the
  Federal government decided that it was more economical to stop the
  exchange of prisoners of war entirely.

  The policy of non-exchange was understood to be based on the
  following facts:

  That a soldier counted for more in the Confederate army then acting
  on the defensive; that many of the Andersonville prisoners were men
  whose term of service had already expired, that all of them were
  disabled by starvation and exposure, and unfit for further service,
  while every Confederate was able-bodied and “in for the war” so
  that an exchange would have been a gratuitous strengthening of the
  armies of the Confederacy, which, at the same time, would have
  prevented the prisoners held in the South from falling into the
  hands of Sherman.

  August 14th, 1864, General Grant telegraphed to General Butler:
  “It is hard on our men held in Southern prisons, not to exchange
  them, but it is humane to those left in the ranks to fight our
  battles. If we now commence a system of exchange which liberates
  all prisoners taken, we will have to fight on till the whole South
  is exterminated. If we hold those captured, they count for more
  than dead men.”

  In accordance with General Grant’s opinion General Butler then
  wrote a letter in reply to General Ould’s proposals of exchange.

  In his famous Lowell speech, Butler said: “In this letter these
  questions were argued justly, as I think, not diplomatically, but
  obtrusively and demonstratively, not for the purpose of furthering
  an exchange of prisoners, but for the purpose of preventing
  and stopping the exchange, and furnishing a ground on which we
  could stand.” The men who languished at Andersonville and other
  Confederate prisons, played, in their sufferings and death, an
  active part in the termination of the war.

  This part was not so stirring as charging on guns or meeting in the
  clash of infantry lines. But as the victims of a policy, dictated
  by the emergency of a desperate condition of affairs, their
  enforced, long continued hardships and sufferings made it possible
  for the Union generals and their armies to decide the deplorable
  struggle so much sooner, and to terminate the existence of the
  Confederacy by the surrender at Appomatox. No soldier or seaman, in
  this or any other country, ever made such personal sacrifices or
  endured such hardships and privations as those who fell into the
  hands of the Confederates during the late war. The recital of their
  sufferings would be scarcely believed were they not corroborated by
  so large a number of unimpeachable witnesses on both sides.

  Colonel C. T. Chandler’s C. S. A. report on Andersonville, dated
  Aug. 5, 1864, in which he said: “It is difficult to describe the
  horrors of the prison, which is a disgrace to civilization,” was
  endorsed by Col. R. H. Chilton, Inspector General C. S. A., as
  follows: “The condition of the prisoners at Andersonville is a
  reproach to us as a nation.”

  The sixty thousand graves filled by the poor victims of the several
  prisons, tells a story that cannot be denied or misunderstood.
  When we consider the hardships and privations to which these men
  were subjected, the wonder is not that so many died, but that any
  survived. We submit, it is hardly possible that any man who was
  subjected to the hardships and inhuman treatment of a Confederate
  prison for even two or three months only, could come out any other
  than permanently disabled. Statistics show that of those who were
  released, nearly five per cent. died before reaching home. In a few
  instances there was a roll kept of thirty to fifty of those men
  who, when released, were able to travel home alone, and it is now
  found that nearly three-fourths of the number have since died.

  The roll of the Andersonville Survivors Association shows that
  during the year 1880, the number of deaths averaged sixteen and
  one-third per cent. of the total membership, showing an increase of
  five per cent. over the death rate of 1879.

  But few of the most fortunate of these survivors will live to see
  the age of fifty, and probably within the next ten years the last
  of them will have passed away.

  Congress has from time to time enacted laws most just and liberal
  (or that were intended to be so,) toward the men who were disabled
  in the late war, but a large majority of the prison survivors are
  excluded from a pension under these laws. This comes partly from
  the unfriendly spirit in which the pension department has been
  administered for the last six years, and partly from the peculiar
  circumstances surrounding their several cases.

  Many paroled prisoners, on reaching the Union lines were at once
  sent home on furlough, without receiving any medical treatment.
  The most of these were afterwards discharged under General Order
  No. 77, dated War Department, Washington, D. C., April 28th,
  1865, because physically unfit for service, and hence there is no
  official record whatever as to their disease.

  If one of those men applies for a pension, he is called upon to
  furnish the affidavit of some army surgeon who treated him after
  his release and prior to discharge, showing that he then had the
  disease on which he now claims a pension. For reasons stated, this
  is impossible. The next thing is a call to furnish an affidavit
  from some doctor who treated the man while at home on furlough, or
  certainly immediately following his final discharge, showing that
  he was then afflicted with identical disease on which pension is
  now claimed. This is generally impossible, for many reasons.

  In most cases the released prisoner felt it was not medicine he
  wanted, but the kindly nursing of mother or wife, and nourishing
  food. So no doctor was called, at least for some months after
  reaching home. In the instances where the doctor was called, not
  infrequently he cannot now be found, cannot swear that the soldier
  had any particular disease for the first six months after reaching
  home, as he was a mere skeleton from starvation, and it required
  months of careful nursing before he had vitality enough for a
  disease to manifest itself.

  Then again in many cases the poor victim has never suffered from
  any particular disease, but rather from a combination of numerous
  ills, the sequence of a wrecked constitution commonly termed by
  physicians, “General Debility.” But the commissioner refuses to
  grant a pension on disease save where the proof is clear and
  positive of the contracting of a particular disease while in the
  service, of its existence at date of final discharge, and of its
  continuous existence from year to year for each and every year, to
  present date.

  In most cases it is impossible for a prison survivor to furnish any
  such proof, and hence his application is promptly rejected. Besides
  these, there are hundreds of other obstacles in the way of the
  surviving prisoner of war who applies for a pension. One thing is,
  he is called upon to prove by comrades who were in prison with him,
  the origin and nature of his disease, and his condition prior to
  and at the time of his release. This is generally impossible, as he
  was likely to have but few comrades in prison with whom he was on
  intimate terms, and these, if not now dead, cannot be found, they
  are men without sufficient knowledge of anatomy and physiology, and
  not one out of a hundred could conscientiously swear to the origin
  and diagnosis of the applicant’s disease. Is it not ridiculous for
  the government to insist upon such preposterous evidence? Which,
  if produced in due form, is a rule drawn up by the applicant’s
  physican, and sworn to by the witness—“_cum grano salis_,”—and in
  most cases amounts to perjury for charity’s sake.

  Hence, it will be seen the difficulties surrounding the prison
  survivor who is disabled and compelled to apply for a pension are
  so numerous and insurmountable as to shut out a very large majority
  of the most needy and deserving cases from the benefits of the
  general pension laws entirely.

  We claim, therefore, that as an act of equal justice to these men,
  as compared with other soldiers, there ought to be a law passed
  admitting them to pensions on record or other proof of confinement
  in a confederate prison for a prescribed length of time—such as
  Bill 4495—introduced by the Hon. J. Warren Keifer, M. C., of Ohio
  provides for. And if this bill is to benefit these poor sufferers
  any, it must be passed speedily, as those who yet remain will, at
  best, survive but a few years longer.

  This measure is not asked as a pencuniary compensation for the
  personal losses these men sustained, as silver and gold cannot be
  weighed as the price for untold sufferings, but it is asked that
  they may be partly relieved from abject want, and their sufferings
  alleviated to some extent by providing them with the necessaries of
  life, for nearly all of them are extremely poor, consequent on the
  wreck of their physical and mental powers.




LIST OF THE DEAD


The following are those who died and were buried at Andersonville,
with full name, Co., Regt., date of death and No. of grave in the
Cemetery at that place, alphabetically arranged by States. The No.
before each name is the same as marked at the head of the graves. The
list will be found to be very accurate.


ALABAMA.

   7524 Barton Wm              Cav   1 L  Sept  1 64
   2111 Berry J M, S’t          “    1 A   May 17
   4622 Belle Robert            “    1 A   Aug  3
   5505 Boobur Wm               “    1 E   Aug 13
   8425 Brice J C               “    1 L  Sept 11
   8147 Guthrie J               “    1 I  Sept  8
   2514 Henry P                 “    1 F  June 26
    996 Jones Jno F             “    1 K   Mar 15
   4715 Mitchell Jno D               1 A   Aug  4
   5077 Ponders J              Cav   1 H   Aug  8
   5763 Panter R                     1 L   Aug 15
   6886 Patterson W D                1 K   Aug 25
   2504 Prett J R                    1 F  June  3
  10900 Redman W R             Cav   1 G   Oct 14
   4731 Stubbs W                     1 I   Aug  4
    TOTAL 15.


CONNECTICUT.

   2380 Anderson A                  14 K  June 23 64
   3461 Batchelder Benj             16 C  July 17
   3664 Baty John                   16 C  July 19
   7306 Brunkissell H               14 D   Aug 30
   2833 Brennon M                   14 B  July  3
   3224 Burns Jno                    7 I  July 12
  10414 Blumly E                     8 D   Oct  6
    545 Bigelow Wm                   7 B   Apr 14
  11965 Ball H A                     3 B   Nov 11
  12089 Brookmeyer T W               8 H   Nov 18
  12152 Burke H                     16 D   Nov 24
  12209 Bone A                       1 E   Dec  1
  10682 Burnham F, Cor              14 I   Oct 11
  10690 Barlow O L                  16 E   Oct 11
  10876 Bennett N                   18 H   Oct 13
   5806 Brown C H                    1 H   Aug 15
   5919 Boyce Wm                     7 B   Aug 17
   6083 Bishop B H             Cav   1 I   Aug 18
   6184 Bushnell Wm                 14 D   Aug 19
   1763 Bailey F                    16 E   Sept 4
   2054 Brewer G E                  21 A  June 16
   5596 Burns B                      6 G   Aug 14
   5632 Balcomb                     11 B   Aug 14 64
   5754 Beers James C               16 A   Aug 15
  11636 Birdsell D                  16 D   Oct 28
   4296 Blakeslee H            Cav   1 L  July 30
   3900 Bishop A                    18 A  July 24
   1493 Besannon Peter              14 B  June  2
   2720 Babcock R                   30 A  July  1
   2818 Baldwin Thos           Cav   1 L  July  3
   2256 Bosworth A M                16 D  June 21
   5132 Bougin John                 11 C   Aug  8
   5152 Brooks Wm D, Cor            16 F   Aug  9
   5308 Bower John                  16 E   Aug 11
   5452 Bently F                     6 H   Aug 12
   5464 Bently James           Cav   1 I   Aug 12
   4830 Blackman A, Cor        Art   2 C   Aug  6
   7742 Banning J F                 16 E  Sept  3
   8018 Ballentine Robert           16 A  Sept  6
  12408 Bassett J B                 11 B   Jan  6 65
  12540 Bohine C                     2 E   Jan 27
  12620 Bennis Charles               7 K   Feb  8
   3707 Chapin J L                  16 A  July 21 64
   3949 Cottrell P                   7 C  July 25
   3941 Clarkson                    11 H  July 25
   4367 Culler M                     7 E  July 31
   4449 Connor D                    18 F   Aug  1
   4848 Carrier D B                 16 D   Aug  6
   6060 Cook W H               Cav   1 G   Aug 18
   6153 Clark H H                   16 F   Aug 15
   6846 Clark W                      6 A   Aug 25
   5799 Champlain H                 10 F   Aug 15
    336 Cane John                    9 H   Apr  2
    620 Christian A M                1 A   Apr 19
    775 Crawford James              14 A   Apr 28
   7316 Chapman M                   16 E   Aug 30
   7348 Cleary P               Cav   1 B   Aug 31
   7395 Campbell Robert              7 E   Aug 31
   7418 Culler M                    16 K   Aug 31
   7685 Carver John G               16 B  Sept  3
   7780 Cain Thomas                 14 G  Sept  4
   9984 Crossley B                   8 G  Sept 29
  10272 Coltier W                   16 B   Oct  3
  11175 Callahan J                  11 I   Oct 19
  11361 Candee D M             Art   2 A   Oct 23 64
     25 Dowd F                       7 I   Mar  8
   7325 Davis W                Cav   1 L   Aug 30
   2813 Davis W                     10 E  July  3
   3614 Damery John                  6 A  July 20
   7597 Diebenthal H                11 C  Sept  2
   8568 Donoway J              Cav   1 A  Sept 12
   8769 Dutton W H                  16 K  Sept 14
   5446 Dugan Charles               16 K   Aug 12
  11339 Dean R                      16 H   Oct 23
  11481 Demmings G A                16 I   Oct 24
  11889 Downer S                    18 C   Nov  7
  11991 Demming B J                 16 G   Nov 13
   3482 Emmonds A                   16 K  July 17
   4437 Easterly Thomas             14 G  July 31
   4558 Earnest H C                  6 I   Aug  2
   7346 Ensworth John               16 C   Aug 31
   7603 Edwards O J, Cor             8 G  Sept  2
   8368 Evans N L                   16 I  Sept 10
  11608 Emmett W                    16 K   Oct 28
  12442 Eaton W                      6 F   Jan 12 65
    186 Fluit C W                   14 G   Mar 27 64
   1277 Francell Otto                6 C   May 22
   2612 Fry S                        7 D  June 28
   4444 Fibbles H                   16 G   Aug  1
   4465 Fisher H                     1 E   Aug  1
   5123 Florence J J, Cor           16 C   Aug  8
   5382 Fuller H S                  24 H   Aug 11
   5913 Frisbie Levi           Cav   1 G   Aug 17
   5556 Fogg C S’t                   7 K   Aug 13
   8028 Feely M                      7 I  Sept  6
   9089 Filby A                     14 C  Sept 18
  10255 Frederick John               7 A   Oct  3
  12188 Fagan P D                   11 A   Nov 28
   3028 Gordon John                 14 G  July  7
   4096 Gray Pat                     9 H  July 27
   4974 Grammon Jas            Cav   1 K  July  7
   4005 Gulterman J, Mus             1 E  July 26
   5173 Gilmore J                   16 C   Aug  9
   7057 Gallagher P                 16 D   Aug 28
   7337 Gott G, Mus                 18 -   Aug 30
   7592 Goodrich J W                16 C  Sept  2
   7646 Graigg W                    16 B  Sept  3
   9423 Guina H M                   11 G  Sept 21
  10300 Grady M                     11 B   Oct  4
  10397 Gladstone Wm                 6 K   Oct  6
     49 Holt Thomas            Cav   1 A   Mar 15
   2336 Hughes Ed                   14 D  June 22
   3195 Hitchcock Wm A              16 C  July 12
   3448 Hall Wm G                    1 K  July 17
   3559 Holcomb D                   14 D  July 18
   1350 Hilenthal Jas               14 C   May 25
   3033 Haskins Jas                 16 D  July  8
   5029 Hollister A            Cav   1 L   Aug  8
   5162 Hally Thomas                16 F   Aug  9
   5352 Hanson F A                  15 I   Aug 11
   6695 Hodges Geo             Cav   1 H   Aug 24
   4937 Harwood G                   15 A   Aug  7
   6964 Hoyt E S                    17 B   Aug 27
   7012 Hull M                      16 E   Aug 27
   7380 Holcomb A A                 16 E   Aug 31
   7642 Haley W                     16 D  Sept  3
   7757 Hubbard H D                 16 D  Sept  4
   8043 Haywood                     18 E  Sept 11
   8613 Heath I, S’t                16 K  Sept 13
   9129 Hall B                      16 G  Sept 18
   9369 Heart W                     11 F  Sept 20
   9981 Hurley R A                  16 I  Sept 29 64
  12086 Hibbard A                   18 D   Nov 18
  12117 Hancock W                   14 G   Nov 22
  12163 Hudson Chas                 11 C   Nov 26
   8148 Hubbard B                   16 A   Nov  8
   9340 Islay H                     11 -  Sept  4
    737 Jamieson Charles             7 D April 26
   5221 Johnson John                16 E   Aug 10
   7083 Johnson G W                 11 G   Aug 28
   7365 Jamison J S, Q M S     Cav   1 -   Aug 31
   7570 Jones Jno J                 16 B  Sept  2
   7961 Jones James R                6 G  Sept  6
   8502 Johnson F                    1 D  Sept 12
  11970 Johnson C S                 16 E   Nov 12
  12340 Johnson W                   16 E   Dec 26
   1590 Kingsbury C                 14 K  June  3
   5186 Klineland L                 11 C   Aug  9
   6374 Kempton B F                  8 G   Aug 21
   6705 Kershoff B                   6 H   Aug 25
   6748 Kelley F                    14 I   Aug 25
   7749 Kaltry J               Cav   1 L  Sept  3
   8065 Kimball H H                  7 H  Sept  7
   8866 Kohlenburg C                 7 D  Sept 15
  10233 Kearn T                     16 A   Oct  2
   3401 Lenden H                    16 D  July 16
   5893 Lastry J                    10 I   Aug 16
   5499 Lewis J                      8 E   Aug 12
   6124 Leonard W                   14 H   Aug 19
   7912 Lavanaugh W O, S’t          16 C  Sept  5
   7956 Linker C                     8 G  Sept  6
   9219 Lewis G H                    7 G  Sept 19
  10228 Lee, farrier           Cav   1 F   Oct  2
     74 Mills W J                    6 D   Mar 20
    119 McCaulley Jas               14 D   Mar 20
   2295 Miller Charles              14 I  June 21
   3516 McCord P                    16 G  July 18
   3644 Miller A                    14 D  July 19
   3410 Mould James                 11 E  July 16
   3933 McGinnis J W                15 E   Aug 17
   4079 Miller D               Cav   1 E  July 27
   4417 Messenger A                 16 G  July 31
   4492 McLean Wm                   11 F   Aug  1
   4595 Marshalls B                  8 H   Aug  3
   5238 Mickallis F                 16 F   Aug 10
   7852 Miller F D                  16 B  Sept
   8150 Modger A                    10 I  Sept  8
   6902 Mape George                 11 B   Aug 25
   6240 Marshal L                    8 H  July 20
   7547 Moore A P, S’t         Cav   1 H  Sept  2
   8446 Mathews S J                 16 K  Sept 11
   8501 Myers L                Cav   1 -  Sept 12
   9170 Mertis C                    11 C  Sept 18
   9321 Milor W, S’t                14 F  Sept 20
   5328 Miller H                    16 A   Aug 11
   6342 Malone John                 16 B   Aug 22
   6426 Messey M                     7 E   Aug 22
   6451 McGee Thomas                11 D   Aug 22
   6570 McDavid James                1 K   Aug 23
   6800 Meal John                   11 D   Aug 25
  10595 McCreieth A                 14 H   Oct 10
  10914 McKeon J                     7 H   Oct 14
  11487 Murphy W                    16 C   Oct 26
  11538 McDowell J                  11 D   Oct 27
  12134 Montjoy T                    5 C   Nov 23
   5044 Nichols C                   16 G   Aug  8
   6222 Northrop John                7 D   Aug 20
   7331 North S S, S’t         Cav   1 D   Aug 30
  10895 Nichols M                    7 I   Oct 14 64
   4565 Orton H C                    6 I   Aug  9
   7511 Olena R                Cav   1 E  Sept  1
   8276 Orr A                       14 H  Sept 14
   2960 Pendalton W                 14 C  July  6
   3808 Pompey C                    14 B  July 24
   4356 Parker S B                  10 B  July 31
   3803 Phelps S G                   1 H  July 22
   4934 Pimble A                    16 I   Aug  7
   5002 Plum James                  11 G   Aug  8
   5386 Patchey J              Cav   1 I   Aug 12
   7487 Post C, S’t                 16 K  Sept  1
   7688 Potache A                    7 G  Sept  3
   9248 Phillips J I                 8 B  Sept 19
   9444 Padfrey Sylvanus             8 H  Sept 21
   9533 Painter N P                  7 C  Sept 22
  10676 Puritan O              Cav   1 L   Oct 11
  11616 Peir A                       7 D   Oct 28
   2804 Ruther J, S’t          Cav   1 E  July  3
   2871 Reed H H               Art   2 H  July  4
   3674 Risley E, S’t               10 B  July 20
   4636 Reins Wm                    11 I   Aug  3
   5902 Ross D                      10 K   Aug 16
   6400 Robinson H                  21 K   Aug 21
   7696 Ringwood R                  14 I   Aug 25
   8078 Reed John                    7 B  Sept  7
   8170 Richardson C S              16 E  Sept  9
   8345 Ray A                       11 G  Sept 10
   7310 Reed Rob’t K                 7 A   Aug 30
   8662 Roper H                     16 G  Sept 13
  10029 Robinson J W                18 D  Sept 29
  10196 Richardson D T              16 G   Oct  2
  10416 Reynolds E                   1 E   Oct  6
  12031 Rathbone B                   2 A   Nov 15
      4 Stone H I              Cav   1 A   Mar  3
    234 Smith Horace                 7 D   Mar 29
   2405 Seward G H                  14 A  June 24
   2474 Stephens E W           Cav   1 L  June 25
   3010 Scott W                     14 D  July  7
   3026 Sutcliff B                  21 G  July  7
   3041 Stuart J                     7 -  July  8
   3522 Smith J                     14 I  July 18
   3598 Sherwood D                   1 D  July 18
   4212 Smith C E, S’t         Cav   1 L  July 27
   4316 Stranbell L                 11 C  July 30
   4555 Straum James           Art   2 D   Aug  2
   4722 Sullivan M                  16 D   Aug  4
   4892 Steel Sam                   14 C   Aug  6
   5385 Shults C T                  14 I   Aug 12
   5563 Stino P                     16 K   Aug 13
   5712 Steele Sam                  16 C   Aug 15
   5725 Smith S                      7 B   Aug 15
   6734 Steele James M              16 F   Aug 18
   7070 Stephens B H                14 -   Aug 28
   7975 Smith Henry                  5 H  Sept  6
   8088 Short L C                   18 K  Sept  7
   8235 Smally L                    16 E  Sept  9
   9304 Starkweather E M       Cav   1 L  Sept 20
   9435 Sutliff J                   16 C  Sept 21
   9648 See L                        1 G  Sept 24
   9987 Sling D                      7 F  Sept 29
  10138 Schubert K                  16 K   Oct  1
  10247 Sparring T                   7 K   Oct  3
  10476 Steele H                    16 F   Oct  7
  10787 Stauff J               Cav   1 L   Oct 12
  12005 Swift J                      1 K   Nov 14
  12288 Smith J T                    7 D   Dec 13
    541 Taylor Moses                14 E April 14 64
   4443 Thompson Wm T               14 I   Aug  1
   5427 Thompson F                  14 A   Aug 12
   5479 Tibbles Wm                  16 G   Aug 12
   7723 Tredway J H, S’t            15 E   Aug  3
  10035 Tisdale Ed F           Cav   1 B  Sept 29
  10142 Taylor J                    14 I   Oct  1
  11089 Turner H                    11 A   Oct 18
   3107 Valter H                    14 A  July 10
    401 Winship J H                 18 C April  6
   2158 Welden Henry                 7 E  June 19
   2601 Warner E               Cav   1 E  June 28
   5543 Wickert Henry               14 C   Aug 13
   5222 Wright C                    16 B   Aug 10
   4649 Wheely James                10 G   Aug  3
   5675 Wenchell John L             16 E   Aug 14
   6138 Way H C                     16 K   Aug 19
   6918 Wiggleworth M L        Art   2 H   Aug 26
   8024 West Chas H                 16 I  Sept  6
   9028 Williams H D, S’t           16 F  Sept 17
   9265 Wheeler J              Cav   1 M  Sept 19
   9512 Ward Gilbert, S’t           11 -  Sept 22
  10033 Weins John                   6 K  Sept 29
  12600 Ward G W                    18 C   Feb  6 65
   6394 Young C S, S’t              16 C   Aug 21 64
    TOTAL 290.


DELAWARE.

   8812 Aiken Wm                     7 G  Sept 15 64
   5529 Boice J                      4 -   Aug 13
   7016 Brown J H                    2 I   Aug 27
   1709 Callihan Jno                 1 B  June  7
   2698 Conoway F                    1 K  June 30
   4394 Conley J H                   2 F  July 31
  12253 Connor G               Cav   1 D   Dec  9
  10868 Conner C                     2 F   Oct 13
  11245 Cunningham K                 1 F   Oct 13
   6217 Donohue H                    2 D   Aug 20
   6677 Emmett W                     1 K   Aug 24
   2091 Field S                      2 D  June 17
   9004 Hanning H, Drum              2 F  Sept 17
   8346 Hills W                      2 K  Sept 10
   5504 Hobson W               Cav   1 E   Aug 13
   9839 Hudson G W, S’t              2    Sept 27
  11634 Hussey J R             Cav   1 D   Oct 28
    790 Joseph W C                   1 E April 28
   5346 Jones H                      2 B   Aug 11
  11410 Kinney M                     1 D   Oct 24
   8292 Laughlin R M                 1 C  Sept  9
    483 Limpkins J H                 2 D April  9
   5956 Maham Jas                    2 C   Aug 17
   8972 Moxworthy Geo                2 D  Sept 16
   9580 Martin J                     1 G  Sept 23
   9043 Manner C                     2 K  Sept 28
   1671 McCracklin H                 1 B  June  6
  11570 McKinney J                   1 F   Oct 27
  12407 McBride                      2 F   Jan  6 65
   9450 Norris Clarence        Cav   1 L  Sept 21 64
   6607 Peterson P                   4 F   Aug 20
   8743 Piffer W                     2 F   Aug 14
   7551 Reitter G                    2 F  Sept  2
  11534 Riddler H A                  1 H   Oct 27
   6618 Saurot John                  2 E   Aug 23
   6479 Sholder Ed                   2 H   Aug 22
   6593 Simble Wm              Cav   1 C   Aug 23
  12707 Sill James                   2 K   Feb 28 65
   5764 Smith E E                    2 E   Aug 15 64
    276 Taylor Robert                1 G   Mch 31 64
   8082 Thorn H I                    2 D  Sept  8
   9324 Tilbrick E L           Cav   1 L  Sept 20
  11981 Warner G                     2 K   Nov 13
  10302 Wilds J                      2 K   Oct  4
    198 Wilburn Geo                  2 G   Mch 27
    TOTAL 55.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

   8449 Boissonnault F M       Cav   1 H  Sept 11 64
  11700 Clark Theodore         Cav   1 I   Oct 31
  11180 Farrell C              Cav   1 E   Oct 19
   5736 Gray G S               Cav   1 K   Aug 15
   9463 Pillman John           Cav   1 D  Sept 21
   6873 Ridley A C             Cav   1 M   Aug 26
  11716 Russel T               Cav   1 D   Nov  1
   6847 Stretch J              Cav   1 G   Aug 25
   8189 Sergeant L, S’t        Cav   1 G  Sept  8 64
  11742 Stanhope W H            “    1 I   Nov  2
  12457 Veasie F                “    1 K   Jan 15 65
   8172 Winworth G              “    1 G  Sept  8 64
   8807 Wiggins Nat             “    1 M  Sept 15
  10301 Wilson W                “    1 E   Oct  3
    TOTAL 14.


ILLINOIS.

   8402 Adams H F, S’t              17 E  Sept 11 64
  12430 Adder W                     30 C   Jan  4 65
   3840 Adlet John                 119 K  July 23 64
   8249 Adrian F               Cav   9 E  Sept  9
   5876 Akens C, S’t                78 F   Aug 16
   8381 Albany D                    22 D  Sept 10
   1264 Aldridge A             Cav  16 L   May 20
   8127 Alexander B                123 B  Sept  8
   1423 Allen R C                   17 I   May 28
  10762 Alf H                       89 A   Oct 12
   2400 Allison L J                 21 B  June 24
   6710 Anderson A                  19 K   Aug 24
  10242 Anderson A                  98 E   Oct  3
   9946 Anderson W                  89 C  Sept 28
  10271 Anthony E                    3 E   Oct  3
   7339 Armstrong R                 89 A   Aug 30
  12792 Arnold L                   137 I   Mar 18 65
  10979 Atkins E                     6 C   Oct 15 64
   9733 Atkinson Jas           Cav  14 D  Sept 25
  11777 Atwood A                    23 G   Nov  3
   8046 Augustine J                100 I  Sept  6
   3709 Babbitt John                 7 K  July 21
   2598 Babcock F                   44 G  June 28
   3783 Bailey P, S’t               38 B  July 22
  12530 Baker James                 25 H   Jan 26 65
   2892 Baker John                  89 B  July  4 64
   3308 Baker Thos             Cav  16 M  July 14
   1034 Bales Thomas           Art   2 M   May 11
   5848 Barber C F                 112 I   Aug 16
   3829 Barclay P                   42 I  July 23
  12758 Barnard W                   14 F   Mar 12 65
  10480 Barnes Thomas              135 F   Oct  7 64
   8458 Barnett J                  120 I  Sept 11
   8762 Barrett A, Cor             25 A  Sept 14
  12687 Bass J Cav                   2 C   Feb 22 65
    977 Basting C                   47 B   May  9 64
   3275 Bathrick J             Cav   1 A  July 14
   4618 Batsdorf M                  93 F   Aug  3
   3603 Bayley Frank           Cav  16 E  July 19
  11917 Beaver M                    29 B   Nov  8 64
  11652 Beard J                     14 K   Oct 30
   1870 Beal John                   78 -  June 12
   6644 Bear D                      93 B   Aug 28
   4573 Beck J                      21 G   Aug  2
    411 Beliskey J             Cav  16 D   Apr 18
   1230 Bender George               12 C   May 20
   5242 Bennet A                    16 B   Aug 10
   6412 Benning John           Cav   6 G   Aug 22
   3345 Benstill John               27 H  July 15
  10653 Benton C W                  29 B   Oct 11
   8188 Berlizer B             Cav  16 F  Sept  8
  10681 Best William                88 E   Oct 11
   4815 Black John, S’t             31 A  July 30
   2904 Black J H                   21 E  July  5
   1665 Blanchard L, Cor       Cav  16 D  June  6
   1983 Bloss P                     21 A  June 15
  11085 Bodkins E L                103 D   Oct 18
   2890 Bogley J E                  21 D  July  4
  12456 Bohem J                Cav  14 B   Jan 14 65
   9899 Boles William               89 C  Sept 27 64
  10795 Bolton N P                 100 B   Nov  4
  10791 Bowman J                   108 D   Oct 12
   3008 Boorem O                    64 B  July  7
  12621 Borem M                     35 G   Feb  9 65
  11921 Bonser G                    89 F   Nov  8 64
   5475 Bowden W                     9 F   Aug 13
   5046 Bowen A O                  113 C   Aug  8
   5943 Bowman E                   123 F   Aug 17
   9328 Boyd B P               Cav   6 D  Sept 25
  11678 Boyd H P                    14 I   Oct 31
   1971 Boyd J E                    84 B  June 15
  10984 Boyer J, S’t                14 H   Oct 16
  11729 Boyle F                      4 B   Nov  1
  12840 Bradford D                  85 C   Apr 25 65
   4259 Branch J                    38 C  July 29 64
   1815 Brandiger F                 24 K  June 10
   1619 Brannock C, S’t             79 K  June  4
   1578 Brayheyer H            Cav   7 M  June  3
   3940 Brett James                 88 K  July 24
   1669 Brewer Henry, S’t           24 C  June  6
   6421 Brewer H                    78 F   Aug 22
   3264 Bridges W H                 30 K  July 13
   9570 Bridges W J                122 F  Sept 23
   1613 Bridewell H C               38 D  June  4
   2367 Brinkey M, S’t         Cav  16 L  June 25
   3056 Britsnyder J                65 G  July  9
   2927 Brockhill J            Cav   4 M  July  5
   3717 Brookman J E, Cor           44 I  July 21
   8911 Brothers D                  48 H  Sept 16
   9350 Brown A F, S’t              73 C  Sept 20
  12450 Brown H                     15 F   Jan 14 65
   5978 Brown J                     73 B   Aug 17 64
   9011 Brown J H                   12 F  Sept 17
   5924 Brown J M                   29 B   Aug 17
   6836 Brown William          Cav   1 G   Aug 26
   8962 Brown William               16 C  Sept 16
   6256 Bryant Wm O                107 A   Aug 20
  10763 Briden E                    35 E   Oct 12
   5785 Buck B F                    30 I   Aug 15
   4963 Buchman                Cav  16 H   Aug  7
  10888 Buckmaster J                79 C   Oct 13
  12362 Buffington B                74 F   Dec 30
   5457 Burdes G                    89 A   Aug 12
   4299 Burrows J                   90 L  July 30
   7055 Burns John                 100 K   Aug 28
   5936 Burns H, S’t           Cav  16 D   Aug 17
    526 Burr W B                   112 E   Apr 13 64
   1858 Burton O L                  35 I   Nov  6
  11858 Butler H J                  89 D   Oct 10
  10362 Butler N, Cor               89 D   Oct  5
   8776 Butler J                    89 A  Sept 14
  11668 Button A R                  79 E   Oct 30
   9824 Butts John                  22 F  Sept 27
    626 Byres George                65 B   Apr 19
  12348 Cadding J C                 89 B   Dec 27
   6356 Callahan C                  39 F   Aug 21
   6505 Campbell J M               120 G   Aug 22
  10026 Capell C                    87 D  Sept 29
  10257 Capsey J, Cor               90 D   Oct  3
   3556 Carl C C                    38 H  July 18
    666 Carrell J                    3 H   Apr 22
   7037 Carroll J Q, Cor            78 I   Aug 27
   3393 Carren O                    38 H  July 16
   6693 Carirt Robert              113 D   Aug 24
    446 Cault Albert               116 A   Apr  9
   1844 Castle F                   103 E  June 10
   7502 Center E R                 115 H  Sept  1
   3907 Charles R J            Cav   5 M  July 24
   6109 Chase E S                   23 C   Aug 18
   9095 Chattenay S                 82 H  Sept 18
  10459 Chenly S                    79 A   Oct  7
   4319 Chitwood T C           Cav  16 H  July 30
   3205 Chlunworth Wm                9 G  July 12
  10551 Choate Wm              Cav   6 D   Oct 10
   9935 Chunberg A                  89 G  Sept 28
   6935 Christiansen J              82 F   Aug 26
   7868 Clancey J W                 38 E  Sept  5
    504 Clark A E              Cav  16 M   Apr 12
   7760 Clark C                     51 K  Sept  4
   9560 Clark C                     29 B  Sept 23
   8834 Clark F J              Cav   6 B  Sept 15
  12672 Clark R                    114 F   Feb 18 65
   5143 Clark Wm               Cav  14 K   Aug  9 64
   9925 Cleaver M               “    3 H  Sept 28
   8750 Cleggett M, Cor             36 I  Sept 14
   5787 Cline John             Cav  12 I   Aug 15
  12726 Cline M                     14 B   Mar  4 65
  12051 Cline T                     15 E   Nov 16 64
   2237 Clusterman             Cav  16 D  June 21
   2048 Coalman H               “   16 -  June 15
   2753 Colbern M                   73 I  July  1
   2244 Colburn Thos           Cav  16 G  June 20
   5597 Colburn Wm                  16 G   Aug 14
    300 Cole John                  112 E   Apr  1
   7211 Cole W H                   112 A   Aug 29
   6971 Coller John                  6 B   Aug 27
    256 Collins Wm                  93 G   Mar 30
   1198 Coddington M J              93 G   May 18
  11719 Compton H H                 21 K   Nov  1
   2933 Cooret D                    78 F  July  5
   4683 Carey J                     38 I   Aug  4
   2758 Corey O C                  106 D  July  1
   6738 Cornelius Jas          Cav   9 H   Aug 24
   3856 Corwin J               Cav   7 K  July 24
   3677 Corwin J V             Cav   6 L  July 20
   6091 Cotton J, Cor              100 H   Aug 18
   9704 Craig G                     23 B  Sept 25
   9307 Craig J                     38 I  Sept 20
  12506 Craig J                Art   2 B   Jan 22 65
   9704 Craig S                     23 B  Sept 25 64
  10087 Craig F                      9 K  Sept 30
   1374 Crandall W M                93 A  June 15
   2329 Crane M                     23 E  June 23
   2253 Crawford Wm            Cav  16 K  June 21 64
  10912 Crelley C W                 29 B   Oct 14
   4879 Cook G P               Cav  16 L   Aug  6
  12433 Crosbey J                   90 C   Jan 11 65
   1417 Cross E                    111 C   May 27 64
   8859 Cross J D              Cav  14 I  Sept 15
   7982 Cross J T                   21 D  Sept  6
   6744 Crouse J, S’t               16 I   Aug 24
   2032 Cruse J                     79 D  June 15
   2179 Creman George               24 C  June 19
  10026 Cupell C                    82 D  Sept 29
  10257 Cupsay J, Cor               90 D   Oct  3
   3887 Curtis A                    16 D  July 24
   8626 Dake G, Cor                100 D  Sept 13
   4663 Dalby James                 73 H   Aug  3
   1826 Darling D W                 93 B  June 10
  10961 Darum J J                  112 I   Oct 15
    356 Davis And                  112 A   Apr  2
   8553 Davis C                    112 E  Sept 12
  10603 Davis J                    113 D   Oct 10
   4150 Davis W                Cav  16 M  July 28
   4048 Davis H, S’t                38 A  July 27
  12311 Delancey L D           Art   2 F   Dec  9
   7013 Day W H                    111 H   Aug 27
   9073 Decker C               Cav   7 M  Sept 17
   4608 Decker J P                 119 C   Aug  3
   7150 Demos B F                   78 F   Aug 29
   2497 Denhart W              Cav  16 K  June 26
   4422 Denior E, S’t               79 B  July 31
   7514 Deming Joseph               31 D  Sept  1
  12660 Denton E, Cor               15 B   Feb 16 65
   2231 Detreeman D, S’t            44 E  June 20 64
   5165 DePue J W                   16 C   Aug  9
    352 Deraus G W                  21 B   Apr  2
   2365 Drieks Henry                89 C  June 23
  12547 Dilley A                    15 E   Jan 28 65
   1314 Dodson M, S’t          Cav   3 H   May 23 64
   8187 Dock C                  “    9 H  Sept  8
   3834 Dodd G W                    21 F  July 23
   4207 Dodson R B             Cav   6 B  July 29
   2867 Dooley James           Cav  16 L  July  4
   1441 Doran W H                   78 I   May 28
   1103 Donen C                      6 I   May 15
   1727 Dowd J W                    38 G  June  8
   1342 Dowdy John                  16 K   May 24
  10143 Dowell J W                 112 K   Oct  1
  10496 Downer A                    24 H   Oct  8
  12436 Doyle P                     65 H   Jan 11 65
  12476 Doyle J                    112 I   Jan 17
   5053 Drake R R                   34 H   Aug  8 64
  10332 Dresser C                   24 G   Oct  4
   9678 Drum G                      89 -  Sept 24
   3123 Dudley J W                  89 F  July 10
   2666 Dumond P                    35 E  June 29
   9947 Dunn Alexander              75 A  Sept 28
  12496 Dunsing A                   30 C   Jan 21 65
   9037 Dyer J C                    30 D  Sept 17 64
  12686 Drew E                      53 D   Feb 20 65
    209 Eadley Levi                 26 H   Mar 28 64
   8045 Easinbeck M                100 D  Sept  6
  10909 Easley W A, Cor             21 G   Oct 14
   5992 Eastman Wm                  36 F   Aug 17
   4962 Edwards C D                 51 K   Aug  7
   8084 Elliott Ed                  92 B  Sept  7
   9703 Ellis William               26 G  Sept 25
   9734 Ellison W              Cav  14 F  Sept 25
   2249 Elslin James               112 E  July 24
   4502 Emery J                     22 K   Aug  1 64
   4979 Emmerson J             Cav  16 L   Aug  7
   9717 Erb J                        9 C  Sept 25
  12628 Ermains F              Cav  14 M   Feb 14 65
    214 Errickson              Cav  16 M   Mch 28 64
   2211 Ench W                      29 H  June 20
  11727 Enrow W                Cav   7 M   Nov  1
   2986 Evans J                      9 C  Sept 25
   3373 Eydroner R                  74 F  July 15
   6268 Fagan O                     23 G   Aug 20
   2436 Fandish S              Art   1 A  June 25
   2230 Farmer F                    21 A  June 20
   4991 Farnham C A                 51 D   Aug  7
  10740 Ferguson L, Corpl          115 K   Oct 14
   2512 File R                      11 K  June 26
  12628 Fermer J                    14 M   Feb 20 65
   3854 Finch F M                   21 G  July 24 64
  10097 Fink J P                    53 F  Sept 30
  11541 Fish J                      65 G   Oct 27
   9845 Fisher S F                 123 F  Sept 27
   2129 Fitzgerald H           Cav  16 I  June 18
   9992 Flanagan J                  42 H  Sept 29
   6972 Floyd A                      7 A   Aug 27
  10881 Ford W J, S’t               17 I   Oct 13
    161 Folk A P                   112 G   Mch 26
   2564 Forney D                    93 G  June 27
   8230 Foster A J             Cav  16 M  Sept  8
   7720 Foster B B                 112 G  Sept 12
  12473 Foster E S, Corpl            9 A   Jan 17 65
    531 Fowler John                 14 D April 13 64
  12275 Frame W                    120 E   Dec 17
  12837 Francis J F                 12 I April 19 65
   5933 Franklin H                  81 F   Aug 17 64
    432 Frass Louis                 16 E April  8
   4031 Freeman D              Cav  11 L  July 26
   2080 French J                   129 B  June 17 63
   2210 Fritz P, S’t                38 C  June 20 64
   1055 Fremont James          Cav   7 B   May 13
    497 Fuller Ira B               112 D April 11
   8114 Funk Wm                     26 F  Sept  8
   2021 Furlong H                   23 B  June 15
   9926 Gaines C                    20 B  Sept 28
   1347 Gallagher P                 21 C   May 24
    579 Garvin John, S’t             59 -   Apr 16
  12801 Gerlock D                   30 C   Mar 30 65
   1340 German P                    24 G   May 24 64
   1416 Gibson H D                  93 K   May 27
   4201 Gibson L F                  78 I  July 29
   4485 Gichma J, S’t          Cav  16 G   Aug  1
   1652 Giles J V                   89 H  June  5
   7988 Giles S P                  112 A  Sept  6
   5144 Gillespie J W               84 H   Aug  9
   1499 Gillgrease J           Cav  16 I   May 30
   1868 Gilmore J               “   16 E  June 12
  12731 Gleason G M             “   14 A   Mar  4 65
   1850 Glidwell F, Cor             73 K  June 11 64
   2001 Goffinet P                  51 D  June 15
  10307 Goddard H                   89 G   Oct  4
   4203 Gooles H F, S’t             47 B  July 29
  12847 Gordon I                   114 B   Apr 25 65
   7953 Gore F                      36 I  Sept  5 64
   7761 Gore N                      15 C  Sept  4
   6111 Garrig J                    78 F   Aug 18
  12461 Gott H                      39 C   Jan 15 65
   9403 Graber J                    24 H  Sept 21 64
   9312 Graber J F                  81 D  Sept 20
   2164 Grace W                     21 D  June 19
   6617 Graham M J                  41 E   Aug 23 64
  10998 Gravel J                    51 C   Oct 16
   2942 Greadley H                  20 A  July  6
   4560 Greathouse J                 6 I   Aug  2
    783 Greaves George              16 K   Apr 28
  12116 Green C                     79 A   Nov 22
  11155 Green John                  23 H   Oct 19
   7836 Green M                      9 C  Sept  4
   3111 Greenwall B            Cav  16 L  July 11
  11778 Greer Geo, Cor             120 D   Nov  3
  10594 Gress J                     29 B   Oct 10
  12834 Grimmins M A                42 H   Apr 17 65
   4083 Griswold J P                79 E  July 27 64
   2501 Grogan H                    66 B  June 26
  10466 Grower H                    42 K   Oct  7
   3730 Gulk P                      79 B  July 21
   5025 Guyen William               72 E   Aug  8
   5961 Gonder H               Cav  16 B   Aug 17
   5074 Hageman Jas             “   16 E   Aug  8
   4094 Haggard E               “   16 K  July 27
  11959 Haginis W                   89 B   Nov 11
   2825 Haines Theo            Cav  14 M  July  3
     63 Haks William                16 E   Mar 19
  11572 Hall G H               Cav   7 B   Oct 27
  12314 Hall H C, Cor               41 D   Dec 20
   7194 Hall J L                     9 C   Aug 29
  12223 Hall J L                    89 G   Dec  4
  11833 Hall Peter, Cor            103 D   Nov  5
  10061 Haley C H                   22 H  Sept 30
   1241 Hallam Wm                   82 H   May 20
   2605 Hanna P                     21 G  June 28
    187 Hanna H, Cor               107 C   Mar 24
  11188 Hansom D                    39 E   Oct 19
    318 Harken John                 65 E   Apr  2
   6684 Harlan J C                   7 L   Aug 24
   6113 Harrell G                  120 K   Aug 19
   2633 Harrington S M             112 A  June 29
  11725 Harris E K                  79 C   Nov  1
  10447 Harris G W                   9 G   Oct  7
   8715 Harshman Peter              84 H  Sept 14
   2677 Hart George            Cav  16 K  June 30
   2202 Hart W                      16 K  June 19
   1980 Harney E                    39 B  June 15
  10606 Hathaway S             Cav  15 B   Oct 10
  12791 Hanch L                     15 D   Mar 18 65
   8608 Hawkins J W                 79 I  Sept 12 64
   2326 Hayward W G, Cor            16 I  June 22
   5192 Hayworth F             Cav   7 I   Aug 10
   1852 Hegenberg W                 24 F  June 11
   8798 Helch S                     77 K  Sept 15
   6489 Hendson Geo B               31 C   Aug 22
   1162 Henry Wm P                  23 A  July 17
   6035 Herdson Wm H               107 C   Aug 18
   8428 Herrell Wm             Cav  14 K  Sept 11
   2365 Hess H                      84 G  June 27
   1906 Hester John                 38 G  June 13
   7865 Hicks Geo W                 65 F  Sept  5
   8303 Hicks H                     11 G  Sept 10
   1102 Hicks W                     85 D   May 15
  12070 Highland C             Cav  14 C   Nov 17
    725 Hilderbrand N               24 G   Apr 25
   8830 Hill Aaron                 115 C  Sept 15
     67 Hill David, Cor             36 A   Mar 19
   8721 Hill Henry                  11 -  Sept 14
   4489 Hill J                 Cav   9 F   Aug  1
  12683 Hinchcliff J                 8 B   Feb 20 65
   6117 Hoen Peter                 112 H   Aug 19 64
   3825 Hoffman J              Cav   7 I  July 23 64
  11847 Hofman R                    35 C   Nov  5
   2098 Hook Jas J, S’t             98 E  June 17
   3255 Hoppock I                  112 F  July 13
   9880 Honeson A F                 38 F  Sept 27
   9214 Hormer J                    38 F  Sept 19
  12090 Horn T                      86 A   Nov 18
     89 Horseman W             Cav  16 I   Mar 21
   5812 Howard D N, S’t             79 E   Aug 16
  10782 Howard G S, Cor            127 K   Nov  3
   3211 Howell J W                  78 F  July 12
  11506 Hoye J                     100 A   Oct 26
   5741 Hude C                      24 F   Aug 15
   6035 Hudson W H                 107 C   Aug 13
   9962 Hughes D L                 125 H  Sept 28
  12755 Hulse A B                   14 D   Mar 12 65
  11140 Hungerford N               108 I   Oct 19 64
   6085 Huntley R                   89 F   Aug 18
   1136 Hulburt D                   84 C   May 16
   1162 Hurry W B                   23 A   May 16
   5019 Hutchins S                 104 A   Aug  8
   4583 Hustand B F, S’t            92 D   Aug  2
   4091 Hyber John             Cav   6 A  July 27
   3312 Iverson J S            Cav  16 I  July 14
   4132 Jaccards S A, S’t           29 E  July 28
   2658 Jackson H                   51 C  June 29
  10287 Jackson M                  123 F   Oct  4
  12797 Janks J P              Cav   3 A   Mar 18 65
   3686 Jarvis J                    73 K  July 20 64
   6733 Jenningsen G B              30 E   Aug 24
   1845 Jenny E H, Cor              79 F  June 11
   2135 Jewet F                     14 A  June 18
   1996 Johnson C W            Cav   7 F  June 15
   9458 Johnson Joseph             125 K  Sept 21
   1412 Johnson J S                  7 C   May 27
   5395 Johnson Samuel             100 B   Aug 12
   9827 Jones G W                   27 E  Sept 27
   8971 Jones J                    117 E  Sept 16
   4889 Jones P                     41 G   Aug  6
    644 Jones Thomas               112 E   Apr 12
   2567 Jones Thos             Cav  16 F  June 27
   2990 Jones Wm                    27 D  July  7
   1764 Jordan B W                  84 D  June  9
   9153 Jordan M                    38 C  Sept 18
   2961 Joy B                       16 I  July  6
   2241 Joyce A                     90 D  June 20
  10513 Justice H              Cav   7 H   Oct  8
  12052 Kane H                      95 A   Nov 16
   4308 Kappel H                    29 H  July 30
   4743 Keefe James P          Art   2 M   Aug  5
   8348 Kelaze E                    20 G  Sept 10
     18 Kell M R, Cor               49 D   Mar  7
   7183 Kelly John                  75 F   Aug 29
   6795 Kelley William              94 I   Aug 25
   5518 Kennedy M                   38 C   Aug 13
  12488 Kent J                      14 F   Jan 19 65
   5707 Kerbey John                 96 H   Aug 15 64
    396 Kiger John                  22 E   Apr  6
  10520 Kilkreath J                 42 A   Oct  8
     82 Kimball Jas            Art  25 L   Mar 20
    158 Kinkle John                 16 G   Mar 25
    696 Kinderman G                 82 D   Apr 26
   7807 Kingham J                   38 G  Sept  4
    685 Klinehaus D                 65 G   Apr 23
   4766 Kenigge A                  113 C   Aug  5
   4908 Knight J                     9 H   Aug  6
  11891 Knoble P                   108 E   Nov  7
   4700 Koahl J                Cav  16 H   Aug  4 64
   2754 Krail J                 “   16 I  July  1
  12685 Kreiger J                   14 E   Feb 20 65
    652 Kaiber John                 16 D   Apr 20 64
   1809 Keyser John                 32 I  June 10
   7927 Lacost J M                  89 E  Sept  5
   7299 Ladien J                   100 H   Aug 23
   7105 Lambert C                   38 D   Aug 20
  10419 Lamsden W H                 78 A   Oct  6
  12044 Lance V                     59 D   Nov 16
  12270 Langley G                   14 K   Dec 12
   5906 Lanner W A             Cav   9 E   Aug 16
   1233 Law Henry                   93 G   May 20
   9635 Lawrene L G                 89 G  Sept 24
  10179 Lape J                     125 A   Oct  1
  10896 Leatherman M                98 E   Oct 14
   8464 Leach W                    115 B  Sept 11
   4172 Lee A                      112 B  July 28
   8524 Lee P, Corp                 16 A  Sept 12
    963 Lee Thomas                   8 E   May  9
   1297 Lee W E                Cav  16 I   May 23
  11258 Lewis Charles               79 A   Oct 21
   6238 Lewis Thomas                 2 L   Aug 20
  10148 Lickey J B, S’t             96 F   Oct  1
   8295 Liday J                    113 I  Sept  9
   6295 Liken John, S’t            112 I   Aug 20
   1685 Linday B                    57 H  June  6
   7768 Linderman H A               99 B  Sept  4
   6414 Lindsay A                  113 D   Aug 22
   1818 Linebergh I, Cor            16 F  June 10
  11449 Linwood J                   79 F   Oct 25
  12358 Lipsey D, Cor          Cav   2 C   Dec 30
  10405 Lord L B, Corpl            112 B  Oct  6
  11222 Lorsam C                    89 C   Oct 20
   2268 London L               Cav  16 D  June 21
   1017 Lowry Frank                 35 E   May 11
   2342 Lusk John                   29 B  June 23
   1456 Lutz John                   23 H   May 29
   8196 Lyman J                    100 D  Sept  8
  11467 Lynch V, Corpl              38 C   Oct 26
  10849 Mack J                 Cav  14 G   Oct 13
   5390 Madden L                    96 D   Aug 12
  11358 Maddock J W, S’t            79 A   Oct 23
  10982 Madrill A                   12 A   Aug 12
   3935 Malcolm J R                 38 K  July 25
   2868 Manning A                  215 A  July  4
    953 Manty P, S’t           Cav  16 E   May  8
   2050 Markman Wm             Cav  16 K  June 16
   6333 Marritt H              Cav  16 L   Aug 21
   2762 Marshall A, Corpl           96 C  July  2
   8444 Martin A               Cav  16 L   May 28
   4071 Martin I                     9 K  July 27
  12757 Masman S                    42 G   Mch 12 65
    863 Mason Thos B                93 B   May  3 64
   1428 Massey W H                 111 D   May 28
    746 Master Wm                   12 A April 26
    429 Mathening A D, S’t          79 I April  8
  12744 Mathews F M                 32 G   Mch  7 65
   1061 Maxem H C                   19 H   May 13 64
   3280 Maxwell S              Cav   8 C  July 13
  10319 May M H                     89 I  Sept 29
   3100 McCampbell D               104 B  July 10
     56 McCleary Thos          Cav  16 L   Mch 17
   1315 McClusky Jas           Cav  16 K   May 27
   4850 McCray A                   103 A   Aug  6
   1617 McCready Wm                 96 C  June  4
   6513 McCreary J                 119 C   Aug 22
   5724 McCone R               Cav  16 K   Aug 15 64
   3050 McCunne H                   13 C  July  8
   3470 McEntire L             Cav  16 K  July 17
   5283 McGee Wm                    30 D   Aug 11
  11623 McGivens J                 119 A   Oct 28
  11952 McLarens B                  89 A   Nov 10
   1634 McLaughlin B                90 I  June  5
   3169 McLing Benj, Cor            23 E  July 11
   4725 McMahon M                   93 E   Aug  4
   1337 McMillan W B, Cor          112 E   May 24
   9763 McMiller W B                78 D  Sept 25
    692 McShaw B                    80 B April 23
   9710 McWorthy W M                92 G  Sept 25
   3279 Mead G                      19 H  July 14
   4648 Medler H                    38 I   Aug  3
   6266 Mee William                 51 C   Aug 20
   2177 Meher Charles          Cav  16 F  June 19
   2049 Mercenner Charles           90 A  June 16
   2637 Merritt F, S’t              89 F  June 29
   7464 Merg F                      44 K  Sept  1
   9145 Meyers A, Corpl             24 H  Sept 18
   5608 Meyers J                    24 K   Aug 14
   2097 Meyers J K                 116 C  June 17
   5432 Myers Samuel                25 A   Aug 12
   9188 Miller F, Corpl             16 B  Sept 18
   3139 Miller H                    92 F  July 10
  11721 Miller J                    21 C   Nov  1
   2257 Miller J M, S’t             31 I  June 21
   9795 Miller M                    92 A  Sept 27
   4515 Miller Mac             Cav  16 C   Aug 18
   3955 Mills N                     11 K  July 25
  10721 Mills S                Cav  14 F   Oct 14
   7989 Mind D                       8 D  Sept  6
    381 Mitchan A                   92 E April  5
  11617 Mitchell J R                89 G   Oct 27
   9753 Mix C                       22 C  Sept 25
   4680 Mixwell L B                 38 F   Aug  4
   4526 Monecal J                   21 G   Aug  2
   2646 Morehead J                   9 E  June 29
   2539 Morley H               Cav  16 M  June 26
   9187 Moran F                     89 C  Sept 18
   7428 Moran W                     11 C   Aug 31
  10645 Morbley B                   48 H   Oct 11
   6402 Mounty R                     6 B   Aug 21
   3263 Morris B               Cav   8 F  July 13
    816 Morris J                    15 H April 30
   1320 Morris James                66 K   May 23
  12757 Nossman S                   42 G   Mch 12 65
   2993 Mulford W R, S’t            23 -  July  7 64
   2834 Mulkey D                    89 D  July  3
  11900 Munz P                      14 I   Nov  7
     50 Myers Charles          Cav  16 B   Mch 16
   3080 Myers C H, Cor              24 F  July  9
   5038 Myers F                Cav  16 L   Aug  8
   1407 Myers P                     24 F   May 27
    438 Nashen Ed                   65 A April  8
    283 Neal Joseph                 16 K April  1
   7439 Needham L H, S’t            42 K  Sept  1
   9531 Nelson J, Cor                3 K  Sept 22
   8166 Newberg H                   22 F  Sept  8
    299 Newberg Wm             Art   2 M April  1
   5778 Newby E                    123 A   Aug 15
   8129 Newlan H                    25 B  Sept  8
   4896 Nicely F                    82 A   Aug  6
   6945 Nicholas L C                14 F   Aug 26
   7847 Nicholsan R H              123 B  Sept  4
   7086 Nugent T                   108 E   Aug 28
  12460 Nully C                    120 A   Jan 15 65
   6519 Obevre O B, Cor            112 C   Aug 22 64
  10851 O’Brian D                   89 C   Oct 13
  11274 Ochley Wm                   24 K   Oct 20
   3847 O’Connor M                   2 F  July 24
   1921 O’Dean Thomas               78 F  June 14
   1533 O’David J H                  9 A  June  1
   7751 O’Donnell                   34 I  Sept  3
   3609 Odom W                       7 G  July 19
   1502 Oglesby D              Cav  16 M   May 31
   1214 O’Keefe M              Art   2 G   May 19
   7856 Olderfield J R         Cav   6 B  Sept  5
   9196 Oley O S, Cor               21 I  Sept 18
  10042 Oleny A                    108 K  Sept 29
   9885 Olson J                    112 K  Sept 27
   6098 Olson J                     89 D   Aug 18
     30 O’Neil D               Cav  16 K April 19
  10469 Osborn J W                   9 H   Oct  7
   6774 Oss                         89 D   Aug 25
   4123 Ottway D               Cav   8 A  July 28
   8414 Owens C                    120 -  Sept 11
  10279 O’Mine D J, Cor        Cav   9 E   Oct  3
   5541 Padon C                     12 F   Aug 13
   6095 Paine S                     88 B   Aug 18
   3408 Paisley F F                120 E  July 16
   6301 Parshall J M               114 A   Aug 20
  12357 Parkhurst B                 14 H   Dec 30
   6303 Patridge W J, S’t           30 F   Aug 20
  12677 Patterson F J               14 F   Feb 19 65
    393 Penny James            Cav  14 D April  6 64
  12707 Penny W                    114 F   Feb 26 65
   7700 Peeter H M                 107 C  Sept  3 64
   2621 Perkins A E                 89 A  June 28
   4853 Perry George                89 G   Aug  6
   9313 Perry J                Cav   9 G  Sept 20
   3953 Perry N                Cav   1 B  July 18
  12179 Peterson J B               112 I   Nov 27
   1686 Pettas Wm                   65 I  June  6
   5889 Pettijohn J                 21 F   Aug 16
  12594 Philbrook A, S’t       Cav  17 F   Feb  5 65
    410 Phillips W, Cor        Cav  16 L April  6 64
   4887 Pierce C, Cor          Cav   6 H   Aug  6
   1505 Pierce W B             Cav   8 H   May 31
   3764 Place S                     44 F  July 22
  10059 Palmerly H                  14 D  Sept 30
   3679 Porterlange Wm              24 K  July 24
   1862 Pollard F                  127 A  June 12
   9602 Post George            Cav   7 L  Sept 23
   5783 Powell A                   122 C   Aug 15
   3058 Powell D               Cav  16 K  July  9
   3422 Powers James                44 C  July 16
     23 Preston C W            Cav   8 M   Mch  8
   6007 Price J M                   79 D   Aug 17
   9059 Prickett F                  30 E  Sept 17
  12597 Pratt W                     16 F   Feb  6 65
  10893 Prime D                    103 K   Oct 14 64
   7972 Puck John                  122 D  Sept  5
   1143 Puhrer Fred                 27 A   May 16
  10412 Pyner T                     89 D   Oct  6
  10531 Quinn P                     52 A   Oct  8
   3039 Ralston John                79 I  July  8
   1011 Ramsay J C                  24 B   May 10
   1765 Ramsay A B                  45 K  June  9
  12763 Ramsey T                    79 A   Mch 12 65
  10772 Randall C F                124 I   Oct 12 64
   8578 Rankin W A, Cor        Cav   1 I  Sept 12
  12680 Ransom J               Cav   4 B   Feb 19 65
   7604 Reany J H, S’t         Cav   6 B  Sept  2 64
   5968 Redmont John               112 H   Aug 17
   8571 Reed A                      98 I  Sept 12
   3496 Reed D                      26 H  July 18
  12324 Richardson T                34 E   Dec 23
   1616 Richards H                  79 I  June  4
   3809 Rickold W                   16 G  July 23
   2836 Rictor Charles, Cor         82 H  July  3
   8632 Ripley J                     9 B  Sept 13
   7748 Riller D Art                14 D  Sept  3
   2074 Roberts W W            Cav  16 I  June 17
   8410 Robinson E H                36 A  Sept 11
   4460 Robinson H B, S’t      Cav   6 B   Aug  1
   6080 Robinson J B                79 A   Aug 18
  10751 Roder F                Cav  16 G   Oct 12
   2596 Rodenberger N               96 E  June 29
  10184 Roferty J O            Cav   6 H   Oct  1
    747 Rodgers O                   12 A April 26
   1807 Rogers Silas                65 D  June 10
   7228 Rogers Geo             Cav  16 G  June 29
    528 Rolla E J                  103 G April 13
   4389 Rosecrans H                113 A  July 31
  11473 Ross J W                    45 F   Oct 26
   8465 Ross Thomas                113 K  Sept 11
    306 Rudd Eras, S’t             100 K April  2
   1294 Rudd F                 Cav  16 L   May 23
   2557 Ryan M                      89 A  June 27
   2000 Saddle M                    27 G  June 15
   9345 Saler J B, S’t              14 F  Sept 20
  10512 Sandler L, Cor              19 D   Oct  8
  11289 Sargeant M, S’t             14 K   Oct 22
   1902 Savage P P                  13 -  June 13
   9915 Sanin B                     35 C  Sept 28
   7558 Schrider D                  23 A  Sept  2
   7163 Schrider John               44 K   Aug 29
   3493 Schaunoller C               24 H  July 17
  10359 Schurtz                     44 F   Oct  5
   1573 Scitaz Victor          Cav  16 L  June  3
  11077 Scott H                     28 G   Oct 17
   4524 Scuyner N, Cor              64 G   Aug  2
  12034 See S                       11 G   Oct 15
   1787 Seeley Charles              44 G  June 10
   9325 Sern C                 Cav   8 D  Sept 20
   4872 Serens R B                 112 I   Aug  6
   1333 Setters Geo H               38 G   May 24
  12827 Seward R                    61 E April  8 65
   5350 Seybert A J                 39 E   Aug 11 64
   9322 Shadrach G H           Cav   7 C  Sept 20
   1661 Shanback Ed                 44 E  June  6
   8861 Shark L F                  113 D  Sept 15
  12149 Sharp A                Cav   7 B   Nov 24
   2579 Sharp A H                   22 A  June 27
   1899 Sharp E D T                 89    June 13
   2647 Shaw J                      89 E  June 29
   7315 Shaw Joseph                 98 D   Aug 30
   4135 Sheeby John, S’t            42 G  July 28
   8386 Sherwood J F           Cav  16 I  Sept 10
   7270 Shields J A             “    6 E   Aug 30
  12046 Siebert H C             “    7 M   Nov 16
  10441 Siffle H                “    7 M   Oct  7
   2430 Silkwood H M                89 D  June 24
   1717 Silter John            Cav  16 I  June  9
  12713 Simmons W D                 42 H   Mar  1 65
   7630 Simpson C                   14 D  Sept  2 64
  12834 Simmons M A                 42 H   Apr 17 65
    309 Sipple A                   107 E   Apr  2 64
  12890 Skinner H                   14 C   Jan  4 65
  10082 Skinner Wm                  16 G  Sept 30 64
   2585 Slasher H, Cor              96 E  June 28
  10663 Slick P                      9 E   Oct 11
   9402 Smith C W                   16 K  Sept 24
   5960 Smith George                53 E   Aug 17
    362 Smith Jno B            Cav   7 L   Apr  2
  12566 Smith J S                  115 D   Feb  1 65
  10866 Smith N P                   28 G   Oct 13 64
  10975 Smith O                    114 H   Oct 15
   4659 Smith Wm               Cav  16 M   Aug  3
   8223 Snyder B                “    6 B  Sept  8
   8079 Sommers W                   40 F  Sept  7
   2165 Soms                        82 A  June 19
   4283 Spangler H J           Cav  16 L  July 30
   9092 Spindler W                 113 F  Sept 18
  11359 Spurlock A                  79 E   Oct 23
   4598 Sprague W              Cav   8 K   Aug  3
   1667 Springer M                 112 E  June  6
  12132 Steilhoult A                92 H   Nov 23
   2532 Standsfield H               96 H  June 26
   1718 Stark F                     78 H  June  8
   1018 Stegall J              Cav  16 L   May 11
  10737 Stevens S                   44 D   Oct 11
   6292 Stewart F                   78 I   Aug 20
   4878 Stillwell F H               79 L   Aug  6
   1640 Stillwell James             38 I  June  5
  10828 Stine A                     14 H   Oct 13
   4724 Stopes S W                  89 E   Aug  4
   8451 Storem A                    89 D  Sept 11
  12190 Storem C                    98 C   Nov 28
  10440 Strand John                  9 H   Oct  6
   8549 Striker J                   11 K  Sept 12
  12822 Stringer P                  15 B   Apr  5 65
   9013 Strong S M                  95 B  Sept 17 64
    855 Stune S L                   40 G   May  3
   8615 Sullivan J             Cav  16 I  Sept 13
  12482 Sullivan M                  15 E   Jan 17 65
   9325 Sunn C                 Cav   8 D  Sept 20 64
  11808 Suter B F               “    4 L   Nov  4
   5515 Sutton M                “    9 M   Aug 13
   4442 Swanson P                    9 K  July 31
  12725 Steinhaus J                 15 B   Mar  3 65
   6292 Stewart F                   78 I   Aug 20 64
  12557 Swarts E, Cor               24 G   Jan 30 65
   6105 Swartz A               Cav   7 M   Aug 18 64
    505 Sweet Wm                    89 E   Apr 12
  10515 Tanner J                     - A   Oct  8
    502 Taylor Geo             Cav  16 M   Apr 12
  10036 Taylor H, Cor           “    7 I  Sept 29
    809 Taylor James            “    4 F   Apr 30
  12526 Taylor M P                  14 I   Jan 26 65
   1825 Temple I                   100 H  June 10 64
   4466 Terry John             Cav  16 M   Aug  1
  12137 Thayer D                    64 E   Jan 12 65
   2415 Thomas A                    16 A  June 24 64
  10411 Thompson D                  24 K   Oct  6
   6491 Thompson F                  10 B   Aug 22
   7128 Thompson G G           Cav   1 M   Aug 28 63
   2453 Thompson John           “   16 I  June 25 64
   6831 Thompson T                   2 M   Aug 25
  10347 Thornsburg N C              79 A   Oct  5
   8863 Thorn J Cav                 16 K  Sept 15
   9833 Thurmain J                  84 E  Sept 27
     46 Tuiler W               Cav  16 D   Mar 15
   3064 Topp A                      19 C  July  9
    547 Trailer Van B          Cav  16 I   Apr 14
  11550 Trask J J               “    7 B   Oct 27
    751 Trowbridge L            “   16 M   Apr 26 64
   1915 Trout E                     21 F  June 14
   2502 Turnerholm S H              19 K  June 26
   3032 Tucker E                    38 B  July  8
  12736 Tucker J                     7 F   Mar  6 65
  10832 Tucker J P             Cav   8 G   Oct 13 64
  10988 Turner S                   120 A   Oct 16
  11091 Underwood D                 11 E   Oct 18
   5183 Vase                   Cav  16 H   Aug  9
   1078 Vaugh James             “   16 L   May 14
   7765 Vincent L D             “    7 G  Sept  4
   1026 Voris Ross              “   16 I   May 11
   3271 Volter George                9 C  July 13
   2015 Vought Wm                   24 H  July 15
   5638 Vox Wm                      24 E   Aug 14
   6767 Waddle J, S’t              112 C   Aug 24
   2964 Wahl M                 Cav  16 I  July  6
   9218 Walker George               31 K  Sept 19
  12072 Ward R S                    15 C   Nov 18
  11345 Ward G B               Cav   7 E   Nov 23
   2488 Ward W J                “   16 M  June 26
  12392 Wareck N                   120 D   Jan  4 65
   7895 Warkwich J                  93 C  Sept  5 64
   5898 Watts Wm               Cav  16 L   Aug 16
  11619 Waterman L                  95 D   Nov 28
   6173 Weaver G               Cav  16 L   Aug 19
   9317 Weaver Alex                 93 A  Sept 20
    742 Weeks Benj             Cav  16 L   Apr 26
  10785 Weedman J W, Cor            38 I   Oct 12
   4941 Weinmiller J, S’t           56 G   Aug  7
  10001 Welch John                   7 E  Sept 29
  11751 Welch L                     24 F   Nov  2
  10085 Welch G, S’t                95 A  Sept 30
   4358 Wentworth Chas              27 D  July 31
   7426 Westbrook B D          Cav   6 B   Aug 31
   3067 Whalin M                    23 B  July  9
   3910 Wham T                      21 G  July 24
   9184 Wheeler J                   61 F  Sept 18
     92 Wheelock A                  96 H   May 10
   1496 Whitmore B             Cav  16 D   May 31
   1699 Whitmore L                 104 I   June 7
   5998 Whitney J F                 89 G   Aug 17
   8713 Whipp Chas             Cav   9 E  Sept 14
   5613 Wildberger P            “    6 B   Aug 14
   5158 Wiley T                      7 M   May 15
  12732 Wiley W P                   32 C   Mar  5 65
  12671 Wilkes R                    81 A   Feb 18
   7840 Wilhelm G A                  9 C  Sept  4 64
     90 Will Gustavus          Cav  16 E   Mar 21
   9785 Will J                      36 B  Sept 26
   8310 Williams A                  22 H  Sept 10
   3254 Williams E                  49 D  July 13
  10899 Williams G W           Bat  15 -   Oct 14
  11497 Williams G B                15 B   Oct 26
  12780 Willis A P                  84 A   Mar 15 65
   4737 Wilson D               Cav  16 M   Aug  4 64
   9531 Wilson J, Cor                - K  Sept 22
  11712 Wilson W, S’t               89 F   Nov 15
   1130 Wimmer G               Cav  16 I   May 15
    989 Wink Lewis              “   16 C   May 10
   8755 Winning D                  125 C  Sept 14
   6079 Winters Wm                  24 H   Aug 18
   3743 Wismer J, Cor               74 G  July 21
   2301 Wing John              Cav   7 H  June 22
   8815 Wood                        21 G  Sept 15
   1042 Woodcock R             Cav  16 L   May 12
   3695 Workman James                7 G  July 21
  10582 Worthy A A                  21 K   Oct 10 64
   2664 Wright J W                  35 C  June 28
   5265 Wright M                    59 E   Aug 10
  12309 Yates J                    120 E   Dec 19
  10766 Yagle C                     24 B   Oct 12
   2391 Zimmerman P            Art   1 -  June 24
     72 Zoran Philip                44 I   Mar 20
    TOTAL 850.


INDIANA.

    571 Allen Jesse, Cor           116 K   Apr 15 64
   1917 Adkins Geo             Cav   6 D  June 14
   3991 Andrews E L             “    6 K  July 26
   4270 Anderson D                  76 E  July 29
   5680 Ault J W                    40 D   Aug 14
   6921 Alexander S                 93 D   Aug 26
   7124 Alexander J D          Cav   5 K   Aug 28
   9292 Auburn C                    65 H  Sept 19
   9445 Atkins J F             Cav   2 H  Sept 21
   9584 Adams H                     35 A  Sept 23
   9643 Allen D B, S’t              29 -  Sept 24
   9759 Alfred W J                 117 K  Sept 25
  10473 Allyn D                     88 K   Oct  7
  10793 Atland C                    32 C   Oct 12
  11186 Albin I                     89 D   Oct 19
  12183 Austin Alfred                5 K   Nov 27
  12513 Amick W                     93 B   Jan 23 65
    313 Bash David                 117 C   Apr  2 64
    576 Bee Thomas             Cav   - -   Apr 16
    596 Bock Samuel                 75 I   Apr 17
    838 Brown T                     66 D   May  1
   1514 Barry Henry                 84 D   May 31
   1603 Boley A J                   66 C  June  4
   1759 Barra John                  65 H  June  9
   2016 Burnett Wm             Cav   6 G  June 15
   2191 Buckhart E                  27 F  June 19
   2222 Brasier S, Mus              19 I  June 20
   2299 Bumgardner                  44 D  June 22
   2458 Barrett E                   42 I  June 25
   2874 Bowman John                 42 C  July  4
   3044 Bruce J W              Cav   5 M  July  8
   3359 Broughton D                  7 K  July 15
   3366 Bricker J                   68 C  July 15
   4027 Barton J F                  52 G  July 26
   4035 Ballinger Robert            39 I  July 26
   4251 Bonly James                 81 C  July 29
   4479 Baker J                      9 G   Aug  1
   4563 Baker D W                   13 B   Aug  2
   4948 Bayer F                    129 H   Aug  7
   5089 Brenton J W                 29 I   Aug  8
   5093 Bowlin Wm                   53 G   Aug  8
   5220 Barton E               Cav   2 G   Aug 10
   2275 Busick W A, Cor            101 F   Aug 10
   5442 Bryer P                     81 K   Aug 12
   5590 Bohems Philip               79 A   Aug 14
   5690 Baker J P              Cav   7 H   Aug 15
   5794 Boom W P                    31 F   Aug 15
   5981 Barton George              130 F   Aug 17
   6163 Brookers J M               112 E   Aug 19
   6410 Brown J M                   66 F   Aug 22
   6518 Bartholomew I               99 A   Aug 22
   7370 Bamgroover J A             101 H   Aug 31
   7794 Barnes T M             Cav   5 C  Sept  4
   8314 Babbitt W H                 29 I  Sept 10
   8397 Bassinger H                 14 C  Sept 10
   8519 Boyd W F                   125 F  Sept 12
   9098 Bortley S                   88 I  Sept 18
   9548 Bray T E                    79 K  Sept 23 64
   9708 Brown J, S’t           Cav   1 A  Sept 24
   9777 Birch T A                   58 L  Sept 26
   9793 Bozell J F                  40 B  Sept 26
   9846 Bixter D                     5 B  Sept 27
  10350 Blackaber Wm H              42 I   Oct  5
  10939 Benton L                    30 H   Oct 14
  11559 Bennett R N                 72 D   Oct 27
  11604 Bemis J M, Cor              87 F   Oct 28
  11919 Brown D                    128 B   Nov  8
  11930 Bailey George               72 A   Nov  8
  12019 Bennet A                    29 G   Nov 15
  12128 Booth J                     32 E   Nov 22
  12294 Bennett C                    6 H   Dec 15
  12486 Barrey H                    66 I   Jan 19 65
  12504 Balstrum J                  93 F   Jan 22
  12596 Branson E                   57 A   Feb  6
    301 Charles James                6 G   Apr  1 64
    625 Connell P              Cav   6 M   Apr 19
    634 Claycome S A, S’t           66 G   Apr 20
   1117 Cox Joseph, S’t             42 B   May 15
   1146 Carter Henry                 2 C   May 16
   1172 Curry J W                   30 F   May 17
   1463 Currier Wm                  87 K   May 30
   1523 Crest J D                   31 F   May 31
   2254 Carpenter O C, Cor          29 D  June 21
   2307 Cottrell M, S’t        Cav   6 G  June 22
   2776 Cooley A                    38 C  July  2
   3043 Clark W                     82 C  July  8
   3922 Connolley D                  9 I  July 25
   4192 Cox S                       66 E  July 28
   4917 Clifford H C           Cav   7 I   Aug  6
   5262 Courtney J F            “    2 L   Aug 10
   5654 Collar E                   130 G   Aug 14
   5660 Crews E M              Cav   5 A   Aug 14
   5901 Clark A                     54 A   Aug 16
   6208 Chrichfula S                93 A   Aug 19
   6477 Croane J J                  22 C   Aug 22
   6646 Cornelius E                 58 B   Aug 23
   6926 Carnahan A W, S’t            6 E   Aug 26
   7383 Carpenter S                 66 I   Aug 31
   7726 Callings W                 120 F  Sept  3
   7737 Cramer A                    30 H  Sept  3
   7899 Cheny James            Cav   7 I  Sept  5
   8051 Cramton R                  101 I  Sept  6
   8108 Crazen J                    53 G  Sept  7
   8133 Crager J                    13 C  Sept  8
   8144 Cooper J                    80 E  Sept  8
   9294 Christman J E          Cav   6 G  Sept 19
   9535 Collins G                   56 F  Sept 22
   9980 Connett Daniel             130 F  Sept 28
  10084 Conel J                     13 D  Sept 30
  10905 Callan M                    35 B   Oct 13
  11423 Cafer J H                   87 K   Oct 24
  11631 Cummings J W                93 F   Oct 28
  12062 Clark M                    101 B   Nov 17
  12173 Cannon A                    42 F   Nov 26
  12213 Cregs Wm               Cav   5 E   Dec  3
  12415 Collins W A, S’t             5 G   Jan  8 65
  12559 Calvert G F            Cav   8 I   Jan 30
   4234 Curry W F               “    4 I  July 29 64
    426 Dummond J H                 65 F   Apr  7
    508 Davis J M                   66 I   Apr 12
    964 Darker Wm                   12 C   May  8
   2205 Denny John                  44 E  June 19
   3157 Detrich C                   29 K  July 11
   3419 Dusan J                      6 D  July 16
   4021 Develin E                   35 B  July 26 64
   4029 Decer P                     32 K  July 26
   4124 Dill C P                    42 F  July 27
   5255 Davis K                     13 D   Aug 10
   5367 Dunben M                    36 E   Aug 11
   5420 Delup Z S                   13 D   Aug 12
   5681 Dallinger W C               38 E   Aug 14
   6147 Denton Philip               81 D   Aug 19
   6934 Downey S M                 116 I   Aug 25
   6944 Dowell W L                   6 C   Aug 26
   9638 Dunlap W                    30 A  Sept 24
  10010 Downs J R              Cav   5 I  Sept 29
  10435 Dane Andrew                 36 I   Oct  6
  10446 Dignon L                    35 B   Oct  7
  10916 Dawson L F                  29 I   Oct 14
  10954 Dial R                       1 B   Oct 14
  12087 Daffendall P H              58 D   Nov 18
  12172 Davenport J            Cav   6 I   Nov 24
  12236 Delashment F, S’t           14 B   Dec  6
  12533 Duckworth J                 85 F   Jan 27 65
  12545 Dawley J                    73 I   Jan 27
  12580 Dawson J                   124 D   Feb  3
   9236 Diver O                     19 F  Sept 19 64
    916 Evans G H              Cav   1 A   May  6
    917 Edwards G H, Mus             6 G   May  7
   1083 Ellis H C              Cav   6 D   May 14
   1279 Evans W                     75 I   May 22
   1346 Eskridge Oakley             29 D   May 24
   1994 Edwards J W                 38 G  June 15
   2481 Esenthal F             Cav   5 D  June 25
   4075 Eaton W H                   58 B  July 27
   4953 Ecker J                     39 I   Aug 17
   5076 Evans J                Cav   6 I   Aug  8
   7917 Ells D                      20 I  Sept  5
  11320 Elston F                     9 B   Oct 22
  11429 Estelle E W, S’t       Cav   2 L   Oct 24
  11712 Eldridge E                  38 -   Nov  1
  11774 Earl D, Cor            Cav   2 B   Nov  3
  12285 Emmons W                     5 D   Dec 14
   1482 Frecks F                    35 D   May 30
   1808 Fitter B                    66 I  June 10
   2143 Fike Tobias                 30 D  June 18
   3014 Fitzgerald I                30 D  July  7
   3453 Fescher D                   32 E  July 17
   3637 Fuget W                Cav   3 C  July 20
   8379 Fields N                “    6 F  Sept 10
   8547 Fenton I                    72 D  Sept 12
   8766 Forward S              Cav   8 I  Sept 14
   9847 Forshua W                   25 H  Sept 27
  10509 Farmingham W C         Cav  14 K   Oct  8
  11311 Fanier F               Cav   6 I   Oct 22
  11626 Fish C                  “    2 H   Oct 26
  12012 Falkerson J, S’t            93 B   Nov 14
  12144 Francis F, Mus              93 -   Nov 24
  12320 Fross John, S’t        Cav   5 D   Dec 24
  12728 Felnick H                   10 F   Mar  4 65
     98 Graham Wm                    6 G   Mar 22 64
    322 Gladman H                  110 B   Apr  2
   1048 Goodwin Wm             Cav   2 M   May 12
   1165 Grimes F O                  66 I   May 17
   1215 Garver John                 29 F   May 19
   1312 Gullsen Wm             Cav   7 L   May 23
   1594 Griffin William         “    6 I  June  3
   2337 Gray D L                    22 I  June 22
   2386 Guthrie W B                 80 C  June 24
   2418 Gillard Wm                 120 C  June 24
   3573 Gibbons W T                128 I  July 19
   4179 Gould Wm                    66 E  July 28 64
   4273 Gilbert H A, S’t       Cav   2 K  July 29
   4847 Galliger Wm                  7 B  July 31
   4901 Gerard H                    35 G   Aug  6
   6189 Goodwin I                   20 F   Aug 19
   6398 Gordon W M                  74 G   Aug 21
   6493 Goodridge E, Cor            94 H   Aug 22
   7298 Grass C                     32 H   Aug 30
   7321 Gray H F               Cav   2 H   Aug 30
   7698 Gerber I                    30 C  Sept  3
   8546 Galliger P                  58 C  Sept 12
   8791 Gagham Wm                   35 K  Sept 14
   9112 Green S                     72 E  Sept 18
   9114 Gillan J                    29 F  Sept 18
  10782 Griswold Thomas              2 F   Oct 12
  11409 Gordon J W                  13 D   Oct 24
  11581 Greenwood W                  3 C   Oct 28
  12216 Grant H G                    5 G   Dec  3
  12398 Garnet T                     6 E   Jan  5 65
  12483 Green Wm                    39 E   Jan 19
    630 Hollar John            Cav   5 I   Apr 19 64
    879 Henick Wm                   30 F   May  4
   1953 Hall L S                   117 C  June 14
   2118 Hilliard J                 116 D  June 17
   2130 Hodges J                     7 C  June 18
   2379 Hustin James                74 B  June 23
   2392 Hodges S                     9 F  June 24
   2629 Humphrey I                   3 C  June 28
   2768 Hendricks J            Cav   2 C  July  2
   2768 Higgins M P             “    3 C  July  2
   2793 Hodges W J                   5 F  July  2
   2812 Hillman H                   65 G  July  3
   2974 Hamilton James               7 K  July  7
   3289 Hine S                      68 A  July 14
   3507 Hodgen J W                  80 G  July 18
   4487 Hanger L S                  65 A  July  1
   5362 Hart J R                    88 H   Aug 11
   5678 Hittle B               Cav   6 L   Aug 14
   5695 Helville N C                20 F   Aug 15
   5872 Heah Jacob                  20 G   Aug 16
   6076 Hearne John            Cav   5 F   Aug 18
   6198 Hershton A                   4 M   Aug 19
   6491 Hendricks I                129 H   Aug 22
   7031 Hartsock I                  30 A   Aug 27
   7790 Hunter J M                  42 F  Sept  4
   7837 Hammond G W, Cor            65 D  Sept  4
   7903 Halfree J A                 32 A  Sept  5
   7971 Hamilton P S                 7 E  Sept  6
   8091 Hughes W H, Cor             81 D  Sept  7
   8347 Hart A                       7 A  Sept 10
   8541 Haff M                 Bat   4 -  Sept 12
   8681 Hunter H                    42 F  Sept 13
   8778 Haynes W                    30 G  Sept 14
   8836 Higgins J W            Cav   3 C  Sept 15
   8967 Holloway J              “    5 M  Sept 16
   9003 Hubbner F               “    4 E  Sept 18
   9329 Hurst R V, Cor              36 B  Sept 20
   9429 Higgins W E                 53 H  Sept 21
   9911 Haghton J                    2 D  Sept 28
   9933 Harrington O                30 I  Sept 28
  10123 Hoffman J                   80 C   Oct  1
  10293 Hunstler W H, S’t           38 E   Oct  4
  10522 Hoagler N C                 39 E   Oct  8
  10613 Harris W C                  13 D   Oct 10
  10820 Hector E                    13 D   Oct 12
  11231 Haskins H                   99 A   Oct 20
  11243 Hasfle J, Mus                1 F   Oct 21
  11790 Hill R                      14 D   Nov  4 64
  12249 Hamilton D                  13 B   Dec  9
  12536 Hall H H                     2 E   Jan 27 65
   6444 Ihn C                      129 B   Aug 22 64
   8963 Igo T, Cor                   4 E  Sept 16
    670 Johnson Isaac                5 C   Apr 22
   1931 Jennings C, Cor        Cav   6 I  June 14
   2212 Jackson John                22 C  June 20
   2353 Jones Wm M                  63 D  June 23
   3311 Jasper Wm                   38 I  July 10
   5245 Judd Henry, S’t              2 D   Aug 10
   6172 Julerso H              Cav   2 D   Aug 19
   6811 Jones H C                    5 C   Aug 20
   7100 Jones A                     88 I   Aug 28
   9948 Johnson J              Cav   7 A  Sept 28
  12517 Jones J                    120 C   Jan 24 65
  12799 Johnson H                   40 C   Mar 19
    417 Kistner George              42 B   Apr  7 64
    618 Kinnan A                    56 G   Apr 18
    858 Ketchum G W, S’t       Cav   5 I   May  3
   2036 Kelly John, S’t        Cav   5 -  June 15
   2407 Kennedy Amos                 2 H  June 24
   1908 Kelso E O              Cav   3 C  June 13
   2527 Kanga J                     74 E  June 26
   3047 Kennedy J W, Cor             3 I  July  8
   4024 Keys Wm                     72 E  July 26
   5149 Keiler W J, S’t        Cav   4 H   Aug  9
   5253 Kocher T                    29 I   Aug 10
   5722 Kern W                      25 H   Aug 15
   6596 Kelly John                  32 C   Aug 23
   7085 Kames J                    128 F   Aug 28
   8621 King D                      81 A  Sept 13
  10689 Keller I                    49 B   Oct 11
  12278 Kuling I                    79 A   Dec 12
  12587 Keef P, Cor            Cav  10 C   Feb  4 65
   1041 Lewis J                      6 H   May 12 64
   1239 Lawrence R J                30 G   May 20
   1261 Lower N G                  116 I   May 21
   2615 Lewis James                 65 F  June 28
   2745 Luff C                      58 I  July  1
   3029 Lewis J                Cav   3 C  July  7
   3767 Lannon J S                 128 F  July 22
   3890 Lawrence D                  80 A  July 24
   4548 Lyons Wm                    35 A   Aug  2
   5014 Lee John               Cav   3 C   Aug  8
   5585 Lawson William              75 A   Aug 14
   5616 Lawyer James                80 B   Aug 14
   6775 Lyons Wm                     1 E   Aug 25
   7162 Lowery D               Cav   2 G   Aug 29
   8607 Lunger A                “    7 M  Sept 12
   9256 Liggett                     52 G  Sept 10
  10508 Lewis R                Cav   7 C   Oct  8
  11152 Lash J                     101 B   Oct 18
  11715 Lakin A                Cav   7 -   Nov  1
  12250 Lawrence B T                42 D   Dec  9
    130 McCarty John                66 D   Mar 23
    631 Mullen James           Cav   6 G   Apr 19
    746 Masters Wm                  65 G   Apr 26
    841 Milton John                 18 C   May  1
    903 Mytinger Wm                117 F   May  5
    954 Milburn J                    6 K   May  8
   1090 Moore Peter                  6 I   May 14
   1405 Miller Jacob                74 E   May 27
   1516 Martin Geo, S’t        Cav   3 C   May 31
   1860 Merritt H                   30 G  June 12
   2240 Mitchell J J                30 D  June 20
   2397 Milliken S L           Cav   1 G  June 24
   2511 Moneyhon B                  38 D  June 26 64
   2608 Marsh J                     88 D  June 28
      5 Moodie Z                   119 K   Mar 31
   3387 Mank E                      80 E  July 16
   3633 Marlit J                    80 H  July 20
   3884 Mulchy J                    35 A  July 24
   4010 Mercer John                 12 F  July 26
   4388 Malsby F               Cav  14 A  July 31
   4959 McDall R                    19 A   Aug  7
   5562 Manihan J                   38 D   Aug 13
   5618 Mageson J              Cav   7 A   Aug 14
   5703 Mensome S, S’t              42 E   Aug 15
   5713 Monroe S                    33 F   Aug 15
   5767 Montgomery R                80 F   Aug 15
   5863 Michael S                    7 I   Aug 16
   6461 Mitchell J H                30 I   Aug 22
   6521 Monroe H J, S’t             44 G   Aug 22
   6566 Mathews M                   42 K   Aug 23
   7043 Milsker J                    5 D   Aug 27
   7233 Matheny N, S’t              42 A   Aug 29
   7272 McQueston J O               13 B   Aug 30
   7510 Myers A                     29 E  Sept  1
   7820 Moore G, Cor               101 F  Sept  4
   7973 Mine John N                  2 H  Sept  6
   8007 Miller W W                 101 B  Sept  6
   8176 McCoy W, S’t                66 B  Sept  8
   8389 Murphy J                     9 E  Sept 10
   8851 McElvain J                  93 E  Sept 15
   8925 Myers J                    143 D  Sept 16
   9575 Morrison J                   4 B  Sept 23
   9600 Miller J               Cav   7 G  Sept 23
   9856 Murgu A                     35 D  Sept 27
  10231 Monay G W                    7 E   Oct  2
  10245 McFarney J                  93 B   Oct  3
  10394 Maples H                    29 H   Oct  6
  10891 Murphy F                    35 B   Oct 13
  10995 McDonald I                  74 B   Oct 16
  11166 Mills Milton                26 D   Oct 18
  11271 Mitchell I                   7 K   Oct 21
  11585 McCarty A                    7 A   Oct 28
  11665 McBeth I C                  28 K   Oct 30
  11680 Murphy F                    35 C   Oct 31
  11746 McCarty A                    7 A   Nov  2
  11857 McCarty I                    6 A   Nov  6
  11946 Miller F B                  30 C   Nov 10
  12548 Madlener L                  12 K   Jan 27 65
  12563 McFall I                    30 A   Jan 31
  12024 Manifold W             Cav   6 I   Feb  9
  12639 Montgomery W            “    5 G   Feb 17
  12709 Maloy I                 “   11 G   Feb 28
   2007 Nossman G                  117 G  June 15 64
   3205 Newcomb George              22 A  July 12
   3519 Nucha S                Cav   3 I  July 18
   4627 Napper W H, S’t              6 I   Aug  3
   6528 Norton N A                  38 B   Aug 23
  10187 Note John H                 39 F   Oct  1
  12226 Nichols J                   38 G   Dec  5
   9494 Newberry M             Cav   7 L  Sept 21
    342 Oniel Thomas                 6 G   Apr  2
   1874 Oliver John, Cor            42 -  June 12
   2778 Oliver H H             Cav   5 M  July  2
   5226 Oliver J                   120 K   Aug 10
   5361 Osborn J                    73 E   Aug 11
   7863 Oliver J                    19 D  Sept  5
   7911 O’Conner Thos          Cav   5 B  Sept  5
  10940 Olinger E                   65 A   Oct 14
  12544 Ortell M                    35 G   Jan 27 65
  12590 Ousley W J                   7 A   Feb  5 65
    287 Peache Cyrus                66 D   Apr  1 64
    559 Pashby John            Cav   6 C   Apr 15
   3484 Pavy W                     123 A  July 17
   3738 Palmer A                    42 F  July 21
   4008 Parker E, S’t               29 A  July 27
   4171 Park John                  129 B  July 28
   4551 Pettis H                    53 C   Aug  2
   4553 Pruitt H C             Cav   7 K   Aug  2
   5627 Prentice J M                22 K   Aug 14
   6159 Penat Alexander             38 B   Aug 19
   6278 Patterson E            Cav   4 G   Aug 20
   6874 Parten D R                  65 F   Aug 26
   7710 Plough J W, S’t             89 D  Sept  3
   8661 Pratt William               29 F  Sept 13
   9196 Plumer A                     2 D  Sept 18
   9705 Pope I T, S’t          Cav   5 G  Sept 24
   9709 Patterson N S               93 G  Sept 24
  10128 Packett T C, S’t            39 F   Oct  1
  11880 Pangburn, S’t               20 B   Nov  6
  12572 Potts I                     99 H   Feb  2 65
  12588 Phepps A                    30 D   Feb  4
   1249 Packer Saml B          Cav   6 G   May 20 64
    872 Remy John                   66 B   May  4
    944 Reed R                      57 F   May  7
   1065 Remcett L                   65 H   May 13
   1558 Roll N C                   117 F  June  2
   1696 Reese L                    116 I  June  7
   2140 Robinson L                   7 I  June 18
   4039 Rogman                      38 I  July 26
   4165 Reiggs K N                  39 K  July 28
   4400 Richardson I                35 I  July 31
   5180 Rawlings J W               117 F   Aug  9
   5259 Rains G D                    4 G   Aug 10
   5454 Ritter Benjamin             29 K   Aug 12
   5542 Ralph G                     68 F   Aug 13
   6247 Roundbush Daniel             6 B   Aug 20
   6383 Redyard A                   65 F   Aug 21
   6754 Russell J                    7 K   Aug 24
   7677 Ringold I              Cav   7 I  Sept  3
   8488 Russmore E             Cav   2 C  Sept 11
   8577 Redman N E                  80 F  Sept 12
   9521 Richardson John             86 D  Sept 21
   9547 Riggs L                     19 E   Aug 23
  10829 Reeves Wm                   42 F   Oct 13
  11410 Rierdon M D            Bat   5 -   Oct 24
  11451 Rutger W, Cor               44 D   Oct 25
  11935 Russell W H                 13 C   Nov  9
  12454 Robinson R                   8 G   Jan 14 65
  12523 Richardson E               127 E   Jan 26
   1440 Ryan Martin                 35 B   May 28 64
   6707 Rawlings E, S’t             66 C   Aug 24
     86 Smiley ——                   65 I   Mar 21
    129 Stein Thomas                66 D   Mar 23
    205 Stonts ——                   65 I   Mar 28
    768 Sanderson H            Cav   6 G   Apr 27
    817 Sears I                     65 I   Apr 30
    901 Shick Eli                   20 C   May  5
   1039 Smith M C, Cor         Bat  24 -   May 12
   1331 Smith H                     86 A   May 24
   1400 Sapp A J                    44 H   May 26
   1430 Swindle T O, S’t            82 A   May 28
   1501 Smith L                    116 A   May 31
   1611 Schroder W                  42 A  June  4
   1690 Sparks L D                  66 D  June  7
   1732 Search C               Cav   5 D  June  8
   2079 Shigley T W                 10 H  June 17
   2083 Stinit D               Cav   6 L  June 17 64
   2218 Smudley W                    5 E  June 20
   2318 Swain J W                   30 A  June 22
   2420 Snow J                 Cav   5 G  June 24
   2447 Stafford J W                68 I   May 25
   2740 Smith J                     65 H  July  1
   2799 Stanchley Wm                 5 K  July  2
   2923 Stofer L, S’t               29 B  July  5
   3416 Spencer M                   80 K  July 16
   4014 Shields J                  128 F  July 26
   4054 Smith J W                   38 G  July 27
   4062 Smith H                     79 H  July 27
   4088 Schneider S A          Cav   3 -  July 27
   4229 Sollman C, S’t              35 D  July 29
   4418 Stevens M              Cav   6 M  July 31
   4630 Snider D                   117 K   Aug  3
   4799 Summersvolt V               29 A   Aug  5
   5254 Scott B                      9 D   Aug 10
   5418 Smith Samuel E               9 C   Aug 12
   5513 Shoemaker E W          Cav   5 I   Aug 13
   5514 Sims S                     101 B   Aug 13
   5571 Sackett J              Cav   6 G   Aug 14
   5611 Stockman L M                68 E   Aug 14
   5884 Standish M                  66 B   Aug 16
   5977 Stockhoff G                 19 I   Aug 17
   6044 Stout H                      7 G   Aug 18
   6736 Sipe J                      82 A   Aug 24
   6830 Strong L                     9 F   Aug 25
   7120 Spellman J                  80 F   Aug 28
   7264 Shaver F                   129 I   Aug 30
   7683 Snyder L               Cav   6 A  Sept  3
   7822 Sanders D                    7 I  Sept  4
   8058 Suthien J H                 66 E  Sept  7
   8107 Starkey I              Cav   6 I  Sept  7
   8262 Sizeman I                  123 B  Sept  9
   8313 Stagewald J M, S’t          22 K  Sept 10
   8623 Swillenger F                21 I  Sept 13
   8666 Sylvanus J J                35 G  Sept 13
   8727 Shoel J P                   30 B  Sept 14
   8910 Storm L M, S’t               6 A  Sept 16
   9093 Simmons J                   84 I  Sept 18
   9252 Sharp D M                   13 E  Sept 19
   9546 Sharpless W                 43 G  Sept 23
   9623 Smith S B                   17 F  Sept 24
   9807 Skeels W                    65 A  Sept 26
  10790 Smith George               131 D   Oct 12
  10949 Smith I                     39 I   Oct 14
  11006 Sloat G W, S’t              44 B   Oct 16
  11187 Seigfred G H           Cav   4 I   Oct 19
  11427 Sweitzer J                   2 G   Oct 24
  11842 Shaw W R                    99 B   Nov  5
  11969 Shoe G W                    74 E   Nov 12
  11984 Steamer F                   29 F   Nov 13
  12113 Scarff F               Cav   6 D   Nov 21
  12381 Starke M S                  93 D   Jan  2 65
  12492 Salts H C              Cav   4 F   Jan 20
  12582 Smith D H               “   12 H   Feb  3
  12615 Sides G                     66 A   Feb  8
  12666 Smure C                Cav   2 G   Feb 17
  12724 Stewart E B                 38 E   Mar  3
  12809 Staley G W                  72 A   Mar 24
   2625 Sattershwait A              82 I  June 28 64
    518 Tenher James               117 I   Apr 13
   3778 Tunblora B                  65 B  July 22
   3791 Thompson T             Cav   6 C  July 22
   4733 Tooley G W                  42 H   Aug  4
   5065 Truman L H, S’t        Cav   6 G   Aug  8
   5403 Taylor N                    63 I   Aug 12 64
   6509 Tooley W R, Cor             42 H   Aug 22
   6719 Todd T                       6 B   Aug 24
   7096 Thomas H D                  42 I   Aug 28
   7442 Taylor Geo H           Cav   4 M  Sept  1
   8495 Trumble D A                 30 A  Sept 11
   8525 Taylor E                    25 I  Sept 12
  10438 Thomas M               Cav   2 -   Oct  6
  12337 Tucer B, Cit                 - -   Nov 26
  12609 Terhune C              Cav   9 A   Feb  7 65
  10219 Tasnahet Chas, S’t          33 E   Oct  2 64
  10356 Underwood P            Cav   7 C  Sept  5
  10760 Upton F M                   52 A   Oct 12
   1717 Voit T                 Cav   6 K  June  8
   5363 Venome James                30 K   Aug 11
   6250 Vanose J                    93 B   Aug 20
   7691 Verhouse D                  42 A  Sept  3
    135 Windinger J                117 G   Mar 24
    886 Walters J H, Cor       Cav   6 G  May  5
    934 Williams A                   6 G   May  7
   1194 Wright Saml            Cav   6 I   May 18
   1776 White P                 “    6 C  June  9
   1812 Wise Eli                    88 D  June 10
   1918 Warren E                    65 H  June 14
   2107 Williams F                  38 F  June 17
   2242 West E                 Cav   7 H  June 20
   2363 Woodward W W                29 A  June 23
   2417 Wilson J N                  75 G  June 24
   2467 Warden I                    44 B  June 25
   2554 Warren E                    37 I  June 27
   2670 Ward J                      79 F  June 29
   2900 Wyn W E                     13 D  July  5
   2929 Wislake I                  116 I  July  5
   2934 Wicks L                Cav   6 H  July  6
   4528 Whitehead J                 29 I   Aug  2
   4639 Winship James               36 K   Aug  4
   4826 Witt T                     125 D   Aug  5
   5399 Wade C                      81 K   Aug 12
   5547 Waynin J H             Cav   4 I   Aug 13
   6132 Washburn R H            “    6 A   Aug 19
   6405 Winders A                  120 I   Aug 21
   6524 Wagner M               Cav   5 I   Aug 25
   7184 Winters F W                 84 C   Aug 29
   7191 Wagoner E                   42 A   Aug 29
   7349 Witzgall John                2 D   Aug 31
   8943 Weiber Charles              13 F  Sept 16
   9228 White W                      7 E  Sept 19
   9316 Watkins J                   81 A  Sept 20
   6418 Wellington H               129 I  Sept 21
   9501 Wilson J B                   6 E  Sept 21
   9998 Wagner F                     7 D  Sept 29
  10648 Ward J                      29 G   Oct 11
  11141 Whitehead N B          Cav   5 L   Oct 18
  11424 White R B                    6 D   Oct 24
  11602 Walters J                    5 I   Oct 28
  12708 Winebrook P                 35 B   Nov 18
  12316 Werper J                    32 E   Dec 20
  12341 White J                      7 A   Dec 26
  12402 Wells J M                   13 D   Jan 16 65
  12497 What J                      93 B   Jan 21
  12737 Wade W                 Cav  10 M   Mar  6
   3837 Weltz Ira, S’t               4 B  July 23 64
   6000 West S N, Cor                7 B   Aug 17
   9920 Williams J A, S’t           38 C  Sept 28
   5055 Younce Chas A          Cav   7 I   Aug  8
   5838 Yorker Daniel               28 B   Aug 16
   1540 Zuet J                      65 H  June  1
    TOTAL 593.


IOWA.

   5560 Allen N                      3 K   Aug 13 64
   8974 Ankobus L. Cor               6 I  Sept 17
   9472 Ashford A W                 11 C  Sept 21
  11784 Alderman W W                31 F   Nov  4
  11896 Austin Wm              Cav   3 A   Nov  7
   1293 Bartche C P                  5 K   May 23
   1570 Bingman W H                 39 H  June  3
   5276 Blanchard A                  7 A   Aug 10
   6164 Bunsford M                   7 F   Aug 19
   7779 Baird J J                   26 H  Sept  4
   8265 Buckmaster F                15 K  Sept  9
   9301 Buell J                      4 D  Sept 20
   9456 Boylan C                    14 G  Sept 21
   9691 Boles M B                    - I  Sept 24
  10749 Bellings J                   5 B   Oct 12
  11334 Blakeley Geo                 3 G   Oct 23
    167 Collins Henry, S’t           4 G   Mar 26
    328 Chenworth Wm                 4 K April  2
   4582 Cromwell G W                27 F   Aug  2
   5101 Cooper S                     5 B   Aug  9
   5244 Cox E E, Cor                 5 G   Aug  9
   5620 Cox W A                      5 G   Aug 14
   5999 Coder E                     31 E   Aug 17
   6378 Cox H                        5 I   Aug 21
   6604 Clamson Henry               26 I   Aug 23
   6848 Collins M                    3 L   Aug 25
   8062 Culbertson S, Cor            5 H  Sept  7
   8352 Crow B                       4 E  Sept 10
   9784 Coles J W, S’t               8 K  Sept 26
   9820 Cobb E                 Cav   3 C  Sept 26
  10037 Cramer J M              “    5 B  Sept 29
  10901 Chapman J                    3 G   Oct 14
  12230 Chamberlain J B         C    8 A   Dec  6
   2903 Davis S                      3 E  June 30
   4206 Davis J                     15 D  July 29
   9229 Davis H                     17 A  Sept 19
   4675 Dermott L                    5 G   Aug  4
   6849 Discol S                    26 I   Aug 25
   9852 Dingman W                   31 D  Sept 27
  11098 Denoya W H                   5 M   Oct 18
  11753 Dutlin S               Cav   6 C   Nov  2
  12245 Durochis Wm                 12 H   Dec  8
  12657 Derickson W W, Cor      C    8 M   Feb 15 65
    262 Ennis Wm                     4 B   Mar 31 64
  11414 England G                    9 F   Oct 24
   3705 Field Jacob                  5 K  July 21
   4503 Farnsworth S                 2 H   Aug  1
   1316 Forney James M              10 K   May 23
   7715 Frue J                      10 -  Sept  3
   7378 Frederick J A               16 C  Sept  5
   8380 Frussell G W                 6 D  Sept 10
  10048 Fordson Michael             16 H  Sept 29
  11078 Fener J W              Cav   3 B   Oct 17
  12701 Ferguson A W                15 A   Feb 28 65
    750 Gain L                       6 C April 26 64
   1484 Gender Jacob                 5 I   May 30
   5004 Gentle G                     4 G   Aug  8
   5836 Gunshaw C                   26 -   Aug 16
  10511 Gray J                      11 C   Oct  7
  10306 Gothard J                    8 G   Oct 11
   5461 Harris J               Cav   8 H   Aug 13
   8106 Hastings J, S’t             11 B  Sept  7
   9379 Hird D, Cor                  3 G  Sept 20
   9417 Hudson M                    16 B  Sept 21
   2168 Huffman R J                  5 H  June 19
    862 Heeler A                     5 D   May  3 64
   1633 Harper D                     7 K  June  5
   1816 Hurlay J                     8 H  June 11
  12749 Hubanks C, S’t              17 H   Mar  8 65
  10360 Ireland J S            Cav   5 H   Oct  5 64
   4461 Jones C                      4 B   Aug  1
   8656 Jenks G A, S’t               8 C  Sept 13
   9401 Jones J                      5 C  Sept 21
   3204 Kolenbrander H              17 K  July 12
      7 King Alexander              17 H April  5
   6464 King E                 Cav   2 C   Aug 22
   3560 Kesler F                     4 B  July 18
  11281 Knight J H, S’t              9 I   Oct 22
    892 Lambert Chas, Cor           39 K   May  5
   2045 Littleton J                  5 -   May 15
   7959 Lord L                      13 G  Sept  6
   8263 Lanning A                   13 I  Sept  9
   9438 Lowdenbeck N                 5 B  Sept 21
  10224 Lowelenbuck D R              5 B   Oct  2
  10881 Layers W                     5 E   Oct 14
  11752 Luther J, Cor                9 B   Nov  2
  12629 Littlejohn L D         Cav   4 B   Feb 10 65
    257 Moore John                  39 H   Mch 31 64
    307 Myers M                      4 K April  2
    450 Moon James                  39 H April  9
   1192 McMullen James               4 C   May 18
   1317 Miller F                     5 H   May 23
   1472 McCameron W                  4 A   May 30
   2027 McAllister A P              14 E  June 15
   3423 McNeil J W                  11 I  July 16
   4804 Moore Wm                    13 A   Aug  5
   5445 Murray J J                  17 I   Aug 12
   6167 McCall Thomas          Cav   8 M   Aug 19
   6815 Merchant Wm                 13 G   Aug 25
   6878 Maynard J D                  4 B   Aug 26
   7143 McDonald D B, S’t      C.    5 M   Aug 29
   8120 McClure Z, S’t              16 C  Sept  8
   9274 Martin S S                  11 G  Sept 19
   9585 Mann J                      16 -  Sept 23
  10110 Miller J                     5 D   Oct  1
  10827 McCoy G B, Cor               5 G   Oct 13
  16950 Mercer John                  4 C   Oct 14
  11745 Miller E, Cor               31 D   Nov  2
  12484 Martin J B                   5 B   Jan 19 65
  12561 Macy C S               Cav   8 C   Jan 31
   6959 O’Connor P                  26 D   Aug 27 64
   9500 O’Verturf P W                5 H  Sept 22
  12160 Osborn F L                  16 A   Nov 26
   1972 Peterson J                  76 E  June 15
   2860 Palmer L H                   9 D  July  4
   6200 Phillpot C P                31 B   Aug 19
   9370 Putnam O                    27 F   Aug 20
  10270 Pitts J                     16 I   Oct  3
  10297 Pugh A, Cor                  8 M   Oct  3
  10413 Parker D                     4 I   Oct  6
     18 Rule Y A                    10 A April 12
   1796 Ryan Charles                 5 G  June 10
   1820 Richardson John C            5 I  June 11
   1951 Ratcliff J                   4 I  June 14
   5878 Reed R                      16 I   Aug 16
   6572 Robinson D                  13 G   Aug 23
   7400 Rice H M, Sut’s C’k          9 -   Aug 31
   9413 Riley M                      5 A  Sept 21
   9483 Reeves S J                   9 D  Sept 21
  10015 Reed C                       2 C  Sept 29
  10017 Rogers L                     4 F  Sept 29
  12264 Russel E                     4 G   Dec 12
  12287 Raiser A                     8 C   Dec 14 64
    451 Stout John                   5 A April  9
    599 Shuffleton J                 5 H April 17
    641 Seeley Norman                9 B April 20
   2712 Smith R F, Cor              10 H  July  1
   2845 Shutter J                   30 K  July  3
   3060 Sparks M J                   5 K  July  9
   4178 Sutton S                     5 H  July 28
   4773 Smith Charles, Cor          20 F   Aug  4
   5410 Starr C F                   30 H   Aug 12
   5892 Sheddle G                   16 C   Aug 16
   7954 Seims Wm                     3 D  Sept  6
   8200 Smith J                     13 A  Sept  8
   9209 Smith O                      5 D  Sept 19
   9125 Sherman J W                  3 I  Sept 17
   9234 Spears J               Cav   5 H  Sept 19
   9367 Smith D                Cav   3 B  Sept 20
  11789 Shaw W W                     5 H   Nov  4
  12729 Smice W                     16 E   Mch  4 65
  10884 Sayres W                     5 E   Oct 14 64
   1981 Taiping Wm                   5 K  June 15
   3986 Thopson M                    5 G  July 25
   6687 Tivis C                      5 A   Aug 24
   9720 Tomme B                Cav   4 M  Sept 25
  11708 Thier A F                    3 -   Nov  1
  10351 Voke John C, Cor             5 E   Oct  5
   1674 Whitman O R, Cor             5 E  June  6
   2162 Wells F, S’t                 5 I  June 19
   2213 Wittesrick A K               9 K  June 20
   2855 Wolf B F                     8 E  July  4
   4916 Wolfe J H                    2 C   Aug  6
   6934 Wheelan J, S’t              26 D   Aug 26
   8101 Walworth C, S’t              5 K  Sept 17
   8131 Woolston S P, S’t           13 H  Sept  8
   9221 Ward O R                     3 E  Sept 29
   9486 Wagner Joseph               13 E  Sept 21
   9727 Wersbrod Y                  31 A  Sept 25
  10848 Wilson P D                  10 G   Oct 13
  10942 Woodward J, Sut              9 -   Oct 14
  11114 Whiting J                    5 H   Oct 18
  11141 Whitehead N B          Cav   5 L   Oct 19
  12741 Wen C                       57 C   Mch  6 65
    TOTAL 174.


KANSAS.

   1614 Freeman F J, S’t             8 F  June  4 64
   1935 Gensarde Thos                8 A  June 14
  12127 Sweeney M                    1 H   Nov 22
  11139 Weidman W                    8 B   Oct 19
   1663 Williams C A                 8 A  June  6
    TOTAL 5.


KENTUCKY.

    329 Allen Sam’l S, Cor          13 F April  2 64
    674 Alford George          Cav  11 B April 22
   1575 Anderson S             Cav  11 D   May  3
   3385 Adams J D              Cav   1 I  July 16
   3759 Ashley J M             Cav   1 L  July 22
   4723 Allen Wm, Cor          Cav  11 C   Aug  4
   4894 Atkins A               Cav  39 H   Aug  6
   6093 Anghlin J A, Cor       C    18 B   Aug 18
   6720 Arnett H S             Cav  13 A   Aug 24
  10514 Adamson Wm              “   15 K   Oct  8
  11759 Adams J L                   27 G   Nov  3
  12426 Arthur D                     4 G   Jan  9 65
  12528 Ayers E                     52 A   Jan 26
  12703 Ayers S                     52 A   Jan 26 65
  12593 Arnett T               Cav   4 F   Jan  5
    193 Bow James               “    1 -   Mch 27 64
    201 Burrows Wm              “    1 K   Mch 31
    366 Byesly Wm               “   11 E April  2
    379 Baker Isaac             “    1 H April  5
    413 Basham S                “   12 E April  7
    419 Button Ed               “   11 D April 18
    608 Burret B                “    6 D April 18
    609 Bloomer H               “    4 G April 18
    803 Baker A W               “    3 C April 29
    832 Boley Peter                 12 L   May  1
    891 Bird W T               Cav  11 H   May  5
    857 Bailey A W                  14 G   May  2
   1167 Burton Tillman         Cav   1 F   May 17
   1200 Butner L B, S’t         “    6 I   May 18
   1263 Bell P B                “   11 I   May 21
   1362 Barnett James           “    8 H   May 25
   1566 Baird Sam’l J           “   12 D  June  2
   1789 Bishop D L              “   11 A  June 10
   2022 Bowman G                “   11 D  June 15
   2423 Bray H N, Cor           “    9 H  June 24
   2529 Buchanan S              “   12 F  June 26
   2760 Ball David              “   11 B  July  2
   3087 Beard J C, S’t          “    1 C  July  9
   3228 Brophy M                “    5 I  July 12
   3433 Bailey F M              “    4 G  July 17
   3909 Banner J                “   11 C  July 24
   3998 Bridell S, Cor          “    3 F  July 26
   4562 Booth Z, S’t            “   16 E   Aug  2
   4653 Barger George           “    5 I   Aug  3
   4835 Baker Wm                “    3 I   Aug  6
   4971 Bigler A                “    6 B   Aug  7
   5471 Bailey J H              “   11 A   Aug 12
   5644 Branan H                “    1 G   Aug 14
   6576 Boston J                “   27 E   Aug 23
   6727 Bottoms J M             “    1 H   Aug 24
   9551 Brinton W J, S’t        “   11 C   Aug 23
   9568 Barnett A               “   12 K  Sept 23
   9628 Brown J                 “   10 I  Sept 24
   9740 Boyd M                  “   13 A  Sept 25
  10147 Batt W                       5 G   Oct  1
  10202 Byron H M, S’t          C    1 I   Oct  2
  10451 Bill B S               Cav   1 K   Oct  7
  10816 Bodkins P, Cor          “    1 K   Oct 12
  10859 Bagley T                “   11 -   Oct 13
  11052 Brickey W L                  4 F   Oct 17
  12256 Baldwin J W                 11 H   Oct 21
  11303 Brown E W                    4 F   Oct 22
  11491 Barber T               Cav   4 H   Oct 26
  12066 Brannon J                    3 B   Nov 13
  12304 Beatty R                     5 B   Dec 18
  12333 Barnes J                    11 D   Dec 25
  12360 Brodus O               Cav  11 A   Dec 30
  12421 Britton J                   45 F   Jan  9 65
   5098 Bowman Henry            C   11 F   Aug  9 64
  12777 Balson L                    12 B   Mch 15
  11483 Cranch J P                  10 D   Oct 26
    240 Conler Wm                   14 I   Mch 30
    484 Caldwell Wm            Cav  12 I April  9
    509 Cook Theo               “   12 D April 12
    672 Colvin George           “   11 D April 22
    877 Christmas J             “   11 F   May  4
    906 Collague M              “   12 E   May  8
   1268 Cash Phillip            “    1 I   May 21
   1600 Cole W C                “    1 C  June  4
   1676 Christenburg R I, S’t   “   12 G  June  6
   1687 Callihan Pat           Cav  11 A  June  6 64
   1856 Clane H                 “   11 E  June 12
   2152 Clinge W H                  40 A  June 18
   2293 Cox A B                Cav   6 I  June 21
   2339 Chippendale C           “    1 B  June 22
   2446 Carlisle J              “    6 I  June 25
   2823 Cummings J                  11 F  July  3
   2912 Cleming Thos                18 I  July  5
   3184 Carter W               Cav  11 H  July 11
     60 Cristian John           “    4 C  July  4
   4044 Clark A H                   11 I  July 27
   4809 Chapman                     11 H   Aug  5
   6387 Coulter M                   23 B   Aug 21
   9835 Conrad R P                   4 B  Sept 27
  11179 Clun W H               Cav  11 L   Oct 19
  11486 Chatsin W M             “    6 H   Oct 26
  12447 Carcanright                  4 C   Jan 13 65
  12700 Cook J P                     4 G   Jan 26
   2223 Corbitt Thos                 5 A  June 20 64
   8113 Coyle C                Cav  11 I  Sept  7
   4740 Chance A J              “    1 C   Aug  5
    421 Dupon F                     12 G   Apr  7
   1388 Delaney M              Cav  11 I   May 26
   1414 Dugean J R, S’t             12 K   May 27
   1568 DeBarnes P M                11 C  June  2
   1027 Demody Thos                  1 H  June  4
   1867 Drake J H                   12 G  June 12
   2736 Davis B                      5 C  July  1
     23 Duncan E               Cav  12 G   Apr 15
   3623 Dodson E                    39 H  July 20
     27 Derine George          Cav   1 I   Apr 17
   3924 Davis G C                   12 F  July 25
   3966 Derringer H                 11 I  July 25
   4510 Dulrebeck H                 11 E   Aug  1
   4556 Delaney H              Cav   4 H   Aug  2
   5088 Dounty P                     5 F   Aug  8
   5899 Daniel R                     9 F   Aug 16
  11405 Disque F, S’t          Cav   6 G   Oct 24
  12280 Duland D W                   3 K   Dec 13
  12623 Dannard W                    4 D   Feb  9 65
  12684 Dipple S                     4 E   Feb 21
   1109 Dinsman H              Cav   4 E   May 15 64
   2805 Davis J P                   13 A  July  3
   2117 Davis C                Cav   6 D  June 30
    639 Eodus James                  1 F   Apr 20
   1174 Edminston J W               11 A   May 17
   1439 Edwards H S, Cor             8 K   May 27
   2544 Emery J                     10 G  June 27
   2341 Errbanks J             Cav   1 A   Aug 11
  12277 Esteff J                     1 L   Oct 22
   1447 East R                       1 G   May 29
    384 Falconburg I K               1 A   Apr  5
   2540 Fleming R                    4 D  June 27
   3640 Forteen John                 8 A  July 20
   4344 Fenkstine M                  1 D  July 30
   6763 Featherstone J               6 C   Aug 25
   7068 Fritz J                Cav   4 G   Aug 28
  10280 Funk L                       1 I   Oct  4
  11549 Frazier C R                 23 H   Oct 27
  11720 Fletcher T                  17 E   Nov  1
   1612 Gritton G              Cav  11 D  June  4
   1618 Graves G                    18 C  June  4
   1841 Gritton M              Cav  11 B  June 11
   2583 Gibson John                  6 L  June 27
   3680 Griffin B                   11 E  July 20
   3663 Glassman P             Cav   4 B  July 20
   3888 Gonns J M                    4 H  July 24
   4438 Gather M               Cav   4 F  July 31 64
   5779 Gullett A                   45 K   Aug 15
   7197 Green J B, S’t              11 I   Aug 29
   7817 Grabul B                     1 F  Sept  4
   8049 Gury J                       4 H  Sept  6
   8903 Gray C D                    20 G  Sept 18
   9318 Gett John, S’t              40 G  Sept 20
   9950 Gill W J               Cav  11 H  Sept 28
  10053 Gower J C                   13 A  Sept 30
  10650 Gibson A               Cav   8 K   Oct 10
  10831 Grulach J, S’t               4 K   Oct 13
  11910 Grimstead J R                1 E   Nov  8
  12022 Griffin R                   11 E   Nov 15
   1235 Gregory H              Cav  12 D   May 20
     81 Hauns J B                   12 K   Mar 20
    237 Holloway Richard             4 I   Mar 29
    289 Harley Alfred               40 K   Apr  1
    292 Hood G                 Cav   5 F   Apr  1
    348 Hammond J W                  1 G   Apr  2
    376 Harper J                     1 C   Apr  5
    402 Harlow Harvey               13 I   Apr  6
    614 Hess Wm F              Cav  12 M   Apr 18
    643 Hendree A, S’t              11 F   Apr 20
   1026 Hillard Geo                 11 D   May 11
   1127 Hoffman C              Cav  11 E   May 15
   1584 Hughes Thos, S’t             9 G  June  3
   1760 Hennesey J                  28 D  June  9
   1878 Hundley G W            Cav   4 -  June 12
   1956 Hazlewood J H               18 G  June 14
   1990 Hamner A                     9 B  June 15
   2490 Huison J W, S’t              9 B  June 26
   2705 Hillard S              Cav   1 I  June 30
   3239 Henderson J                 18 B  July 12
     26 Hooper Saml            Cav  11 D   Apr 16
   3944 Hooper J                     1 H  July 25
   3994 Hickworth J                 45 H  July 26
   4313 Hall J H               Cav   1 C  July 30
   4420 Hammontius P                 6 L  June 30
   4970 Hayner E                     1 D   Aug  7
   5059 Haines J                    12 D   Aug  8
   5091 Harrington C                15 K   Aug  8
   5793 Hatfield L                   1 F   Aug 15
   6193 Hendrie Wm             Cav  11 F   Aug 19
   6801 Hardison G                  23 I   Aug 25
   8032 Hise P                       4 I  Sept  6
   8111 Hicks P                Cav  11 F  Sept  7
   8181 Heglen C                “    4 I  Sept  8
   9376 Hanker R                “   18 F  Sept 20
   9599 Hyrommus Jas            “   11 H  Sept 23
  10683 Halton S M                   2 K   Oct 11
  11054 Halligan J                   4 A   Oct 17
  11095 Hall F                 Cav   1 F   Oct 18
  11132 Hazer John                  11 I   Oct 18
  11251 Harter F               Cav  12 M   Oct 21
  12293 Hays J F                     5 A   Dec 15
  12518 Hasting J                    4 H   Jan 24 65
  12638 Hudson B F                   4 A   Feb 11
   5734 Inman John                  24 A   Aug 15 64
   9757 Isabell J M                  3 H  Sept 25
  11392 Inman W                Cav  11 H   Oct 24
  12203 Isabel A                     1 K   Dec  1
    649 Jackson John                45 D   Apr 20
   2679 Jeffries Wm            Cav   1 A  June 30
   5229 Jacobs John W           “    4 I   Aug 10
   7294 Johnson A                   10 H   Aug 31
   7371 Jenkins S              Cav   6 A   Aug 31
   7594 Justin J                    39 F  Sept  2
   7754 James W                      5 K  Sept  4 64
   9654 Jarvis W D                  12 D  Sept 24
  11000 Jordan J               Cav   5 B   Oct 16
  11143 Jones D                 “    1 L   Oct 18
  12541 Jones J                     16 E   Jan 27 65
     87 Kennedy Jas            Cav  11 E   Mar 21 64
    191 Knotts Fred             “   11 E   Mar 27
    926 Kessmer John            “   12 I   May  7
   1045 Kennedy S B                 39 B   May 12
   1173 Keiling M              Cav  11 D   May 17
   3928 Keystone C                   6 E  July 25
   4921 Kennedy A, Cor         Cav   1 A  July  6
   5553 Knapp Thos              “    6 M  July 13
   5925 Kressler P              “    4 K  July 17
  12265 Knapp J                 “    5 B   Dec 12
     48 Lenniert L                   1 K   Mar 15
    310 Lambert R              Cav  11 F   Apr  2
   1135 Lay Wm                  “   11 D   May 16
   1726 Lossman A               “    4 E  June  8
   1802 Larger W                “    1 L  June 10
   1912 Ledford J A                 16 B  June 13
   2109 Little J                     1 D  June 17
   2852 Lononey B              Cav   1 K  June 23
   2668 Lasper Otto                 15 H  June 29
    837 Lublett M L                 13 E  June  3
   3340 Leville Thos                 4 D  July 15
   3398 Lee S                  Cav   1 A  July 16
   3658 Loy W B                 “    8 L  July 20
   3776 Lanhart J               “    6 G  July 22
   3899 Lawry Jas W             “   12 G  July 23
   6024 Lewis T                 “    2 C   Aug 18
   7132 Landers, Cor                26 I   Aug 28
   7934 Luster W               Cav   1 B  Sept  5
   8634 Little J F              “   12 D  Sept 13
  11870 Lindusky G                  11 G   Nov  6
  12175 Ledwick A                    7 C   Nov 27
   9175 Lord Wm                     20 G  Sept 18
    271 McMannus Saml               11 D   Mar 31
    369 Miller John                  3 A   Apr  5
    525 McDougal W C                14 K   Apr 13
    796 Mills John                   1 H   Apr 29
    991 McClure P              Cav  11 C   May 10
   1222 Marshall Wm             “    5 I   May 19
   1380 Montgomery W A          “    5 H   May 26
   1391 Moreland H             Cav   1 F   May 26
   1969 Merix J                 “   45 D  June 14
   2024 Morton W                “    7 I  June 15
   2137 Meldown D               “   11 E  June 18
   2669 Miller W C              “   27 A  June 29
   3152 Mitchell Jas            “   12 C  July 11
     64 Mullins W W             “    1 H   Aug  8
   3418 Morgan J                “    4 D  July 17
   4513 Masters J               “   11 A   Aug  1
   4550 McDonald J              “    4 I   Aug  2
   4646 Mitchell R M            “   17 E   Aug  3
   5691 Mooney Pat              “   11 G   Aug 15
   7951 McCarty E               “    5 K  Sept  6
   8455 McCarty John            “    6 K  Sept  9
   8685 McCarter W              “    9 B  Sept 13
   9239 Munch J                 “   28 F  Sept 19
   9498 Macary C                “   11 M  Sept 21
   9711 Moore Wm                “   12 D  Sept 24
   7336 Martin F P              “   12 D   Aug 30
  10170 Marshall L              “    1 F   Oct  1
  10460 Mills George            “    4 H   Oct  7
  11455 Murphy W M              “    2 H   Oct 25
  11478 Miller E                “    4 I   Oct 26
  12456 Miller J                “    4 K   Jan 16 65
  12491 Myers J                 “    4 C   Jan 20
  12720 Meach A J               “    1 A   Mar  3
  12764 Morgan F, Cor                3 I   Mar 12
    212 New Geo W              Cav   1 F   Mar 28 64
    447 Neely B W               “    1 G   Apr  9
     63 Nelson John             “    1 D  July 19
   7693 Northcraft J            “    6 H  Sept  3
   9230 Newton A, Cor           “    4 H  Sept 19
   2499 O’Bannon Wm             “   11 B  June 20
   2513 Oper L                  “    4 B  June 26
  11943 Owen W, Cor             “    1 L   Nov  9
   1178 Pott J                  “    7 C   May 17
   1905 Porter J F              “   18 -  June 13
   3654 Pulliam J                    2 -  July 20
   4220 Plyman Wm                   39 -  July 27
   5761 Pally S C, S’t         Cav  12 B   Aug 15
   6616 Phelps Wm E             “    6 F   Aug 23
   6632 Pruils W H              “    1 F   Aug 23
   7222 Pope Frank, Cor         “    5 B   Aug 29
   8070 Pott Samuel             “    4 G  Sept 17
   8207 Patterson J             “    2 B  Sept  8
   9299 Phelps F M, S’t         “   11 I  Sept 20
  10249 Partis J R              “    1 F   Oct  3
  12220 Pace John               “    3 G   Dec  4
  12327 Purcell J               “    1 G   Dec 23
   2144 Queata J                “   11 E  June 18
    452 Rurves E, S’t           “    4 F   Apr  9
    577 Roberts R               “   12 H   Apr 16
    590 Ramy Lester             “   39 H   Apr 17
    637 Raberie Geo             “    1 A   Apr 20
    825 Richardson M, Cor            3 H   May  1
   1097 Ruus T                 Cav  11 H   May 14
   1193 Russell Jacob           “   12 B   May 18
   1355 Ritter B B              “    6 L   May 25
   1555 Rose R C, Cor           “    6 B  June  2
   1571 Rogers W                     1 F  June  3
   2463 Reve F N                    11 F  June 25
   2751 Reilly Thos                  1 D  July  1
   4018 Ramsay Robert               45 A  July 26
   4482 Robertson H            Cav  11 D   Aug  1
   4549 Rodes James             “    1 F   Aug  2
   4919 Rockwell W W, Cl        C    1 C   Aug  6
   5775 Roberts L               “    1 K   Aug 15
   5067 Rieff R                Art   1 -   Aug 17
   5976 Roberts A              Cav   1 K   Aug 17
   6274 Readman W               “   11 I   Aug 20
   7215 Rogers Henry            “   12 A   Aug 29
  10124 Robny F                 “   15 E   Oct  1
  11369 Racine P                “   12 I   Oct 27
  11583 Ryan W                  “    1 I   Oct 28
  11642 Riddle J H              “    1 I   Oct 30
  11644 Rogers Wm               “    2 I   Oct 30
  11873 Rusby J                 “    2 F   Nov  6
  12828 Rice P D, S’t                3 I   Apr  9 65
   1202 Ruble L, Cor           Cav  11 D   May 19 64
   4106 Rankin J H, S’t         “   18 G  July 27
    213 Simpson W               “    1 C   Mar 28
    277 Sims Geo, S’t               40 I   Mar 31
    567 Summers W H            Cav  11 D   Apr 15
    797 Smith Geo               “   13 G   Apr 29
    925 Sallac Geo, Cor         “   11 C   May  7
    995 Smith Wm A              “    4 K   May 10
   1003 Smith H                Cav  16 B   May 10
   1101 Smith R C               “    1 I   May 14
   1180 Schafer J E             “    4 A   May 18
   1500 Stempf Lewis            “   12 G   May 31
   1659 Sutherland J E, S’t     C    1 C  June  6 64
   1681 Sebastian J W               45 C  June  6
   1691 Sanders J S            Cav  12 E  June  7
   1708 Stine C                 “    4 K  June  7
   1716 Sandfer Jno             “   11 B  June  8
   1811 Summers Wm              “   11 D  June 10
   1827 Sweeney M               “    5 I  June 11
   1952 Shirley John            “   28 E  June 14
   1964 Stanley C O             “   17 E  June 14
   2063 Salmond P               “   18 H  June 16
   2094 Shanks W L              “    6 B  June 17
   2766 Show J                  “   11 I  July  6
     44 Smith John              “    2 I   May 13
     51 Shaggs I P              “   11 G  June  2
   3402 Shuman J                “    4 A  July 16
   4258 Smith B, Cor            “    5 A  July 29
   4829 Schmal And’w            “    4 B   Aug  6
   4831 Schottsman F, Cor       C    1 D   Aug  6
   4976 Snyder H M             Cav  10 B   Aug  7
   5297 Smith W H, Cor              27 E   Aug 11
   6260 Stevens P L, S’t        C   12 G   Aug 20
   6280 Schrausburg R           C    1 K   Aug 20
   8226 Stimett J              Cav   6 K  Sept  9
   8487 Sutton Thos             “    6 A  Sept 11
   8827 Shulds J                “    2 K  Sept 15
  10154 Sanders B               “    4 F   Oct  1
  10673 Sheppard T L            “    5 H   Oct 11
  11456 Sapp B                  “    1 B   Oct 25
  11898 Selors W H              “    1 C   Nov  7
  12556 Stewart E               “    4 A   Jan 30 65
  10197 Sawney Wm               “    5 H   Oct  2 64
   2654 Sutherland H                32 G  June 29
    253 Taylor Thos, Cor        C   11 H   Mar 30
    391 Thrope H               Cav   1 B April  6
    781 Tucker Wm               “   12 I April 28
   1009 Travis Geo              “   16 E   May 10
   1628 Truney J                “   11 C  June  4
   2116 Tutune J, S’t           “   11 A  June 17
   2371 Tudor Ab’m, Cor         C   11 A  June 23
   3701 Tullor G W                  28 A  July 21
   5424 Tabu Silas                  27 D   Aug 12
   6234 Templeton W H, Cor      C   11 B   Aug 20
   6257 Tapp George            Cav  13 I   Aug 20
   6508 Tracy James             “   11 L   Aug 22
   6956 Thorp J                 “    4 K   Aug 26
   7205 Tucker Rob’t            “   17 G   Aug 29
  10028 Tucker J A              “   15 A  Sept 29
  10398 Thornburg B             “    2 G   Oct  6
  10588 Tussey E D              “   24 A   Oct 10
  10809 Terry Wm                “    1 A   Oct 12
  10892 Thomas W E, S’t         C   11 G   Oct 14
  10657 Vandevier J            Cav  11 C   Oct 11
    278 West John C             “   11 E   Mar 31
    494 White A                 “    6 K April 12
    735 Wailar M R              “   16 C April 24
   1125 White John              “   11 D   May 15
   1706 Westfall J              “    4 D  June  7
   1734 Wickles John                40 K  June  8
   1745 Walsh J E              Cav   6 L  June  8
   1894 Wright Jno E, Cor       “    1 -  June 13
   2199 Wheelan Jas             “   18 C  June 19
   2584 White C                 “    1 H  June 27
   2901 Wiser R M               “    1 B  July  5
     40 Ward F W                “    1 A   May  3
   4374 Warren W P              “   34 K  July 30
   4624 Wallace H               “   14 E   Aug  3
   4697 West P H                “    6 K   Aug  3
   5057 Webb J                  “    6 F   Aug  8 64
   5762 Welch T C               “    5 G   Aug 15
   5790 Walsh John              “    6 H   Aug 15
   6101 Winter H                “   11 E   Aug 18
   6121 Winfries W S            “    3 A   Aug 19
   6893 White S A               “   17 G   Aug 26
   7038 Willser J               “   11 I   Aug 27
   7694 Wells J W               “   12 C   Aug  3
   8533 Wallace J, S’t          “   11 K  Sept 12
   9258 Warner D                “   12 A  Sept 19
   9541 Wicog S                 “    4 I  Sept 23
   9636 Wagoner H, Cor          C    4 I  Sept 24
  10770 Warner Thos            Cav  15 F   Oct 12
  10898 Walton J J              “    8 A   Oct 14
  11749 Willit M                “    4 I   Nov  2
  12279 Weasett A               “    1 D   Nov 13
    904 Yocombs H               “   11 D   May  5
   1166 Yoam J                  “   10 D   May 17
   2689 Yeager L, S’t           “   11 C  June 30
   3757 Yeast R                 “    1 I  July 22
   5257 Zertes G                “    4 G   Aug 10
    TOTAL 436.


LOUISIANA.

  6778 Kimball Jas            Cav   2 A   Aug 25 64


MAINE.

   2604 Anderson John               19 I  June 28 64
   3093 Allen A                     32 K  July 10
   7024 Arnold E W                  17 G   Aug 27
     22 Butler C A                   3 K   Mar  7
    269 Brown E M                    5 G   Mar 31
   3953 Buner A E                   31 E  July 25
   6211 Bachelor P, S’t              3 K   Aug 19
   9162 Baker James                 17 H  Sept 18
  10669 Ballast J                   19 G   Oct 11
   7663 Bartlett H                  17 C  Sept  3
   7255 Barney G S                  32 I   Aug 30
   6683 Bean G W                     8 C   Aug 24
   6603 Bennett L              Art   1 -   Aug 23
   9097 Berry C H                    6 H  Sept 18
   7645 Bigelow C                   19 H  Sept  3
   5290 Blaizdell H                  8 F   Aug 11
  12055 Boren W                     16 I   Nov 16
   9408 Bowden ——                    7 A  Sept 21
   4776 Braley J                     3 E   Aug  4
   5015 Briggs J C                  19 F   Aug  8
   8542 Brinkerman L                 9 D  Sept 11
   8247 Broadstreet C B         C    1 B  Sept  9
   6811 Brown J                      8 G   Aug 25
  11980 Bryant C D                  16 E   Nov 13
   5719 Bullsen E T, S’t        C    5 B   Aug 15
   5757 Bunker S A             Art   1 A   Aug 15
   8474 Burgen A                     4 I  Sept 11
   7017 Cardoney C                  17 G   Aug 27
   7746 Carlen M               Cav   1 F  Sept  3
   8374 Carr J                      19 E  Sept 10
   6246 Carlton J S                 31 D   Aug 19
   5989 Chase F W              Art   1 D   Aug 17
   2316 Clark James            Cav   1 C  June 26
   8143 Clark P M, S’t          “    1 C  Sept  8
  10376 Clark L                     19 D   Oct  5
  10421 Clayton E B                  1 F   Oct  6
     28 Cohan D                      3 K   Mch  7
   6950 Conder W H                  16 G   Aug 26
   8037 Conley W                     5 F  Sept  6
   3943 Cook James                   4 D  July 25 64
   8433 Condon D H                  20 K  Sept 11
    425 Craw H                       3 B April  7
  12061 Cressy N F                  11 G   Nov 17
  10936 Cromwell S R, Cor       A    1 M  Sept 14
  11211 Cromwell W H                19 D   Oct 20
   8625 Curtiss John                16 I  Sept 13
  12367 Cutts O M                   16 D   Jan  1 65
     80 Cutler A                    20 E   Mch 20 64
   5171 Cross Noah             Art   1 A   Aug  9
   8581 Crosby W                     4 A  Sept 12
   8445 Davis D                      3 C  Sept 11
    227 Davis Wm L                  20 E   Mch 29
   5615 Dougherty Thos               8 G   Aug 14
   6612 Donnell F                    8 E   Aug 23
   9624 Downes J                     8 G  Sept 23
   1359 Doyle Wm                     6 D   May 25
   5481 Drisdale F                   1 H   Aug 13
   4425 Duffy A                      3 G  July 31
   6415 Dugan D                     32 A   Aug 21
   6438 Dunning S P                 29 G   Aug 21
   7240 Dunnie G                     5 G   Aug 29
   6357 Dye John               Cav   1 E   Aug 21
   5035 Dittener H                  20 A   Aug  8
  10608 Eckhard H                    7 C  Sept 10
   7212 Edwards N S            Cav   1 F   Aug 29
   8538 Ellis A                Art   2 H  Sept 11
   1877 Emmerson H H                 3 -  June 12
   2628 Farewell E                  31 E  June 28
   8401 Ferrell P                    6 H  Sept 10
   4765 Fish Wm                      7 A   Aug  5
   5243 Flagg J B                    5 K   Aug 10
     69 Flanders L G                20 E   Mch 19
   1989 Foley John                  19 E  June 15
   2362 Forrest Thos           Cav   1 E  June 23
   2482 Foster A, Cor                6 K  June 25
   8145 Foster E R                  16 C  Sept  8
   7073 Foster Samuel C             16 K   Aug 28
   6191 Frisble L                    7 C   Aug 19
  10957 Fitzgerald Joseph            8 E   Oct 14
   5907 Gardner W H, S’t             4 -   Aug 16
  12515 Gibbs R                     19 K   Jan 23 65
   2906 Gilgan W                     7 C  July  5 64
   6107 Goodward A             Art   1 I   Aug 18
   5580 Goodwin M T                  8 F   Aug 14
   4141 Grant G                Art   1 F  July 28
   7391 Grant Frank                 16 F   Aug 30
   8392 Griffith S                   8 G  Sept 10
   9190 Gunney C                    31 A  Sept 18
  10031 Gunney J F, S’t              1 I  Sept 29
  11823 Gilgrist ——                 31 E   Nov  5
   8306 Hammond J                   19 G  Sept 10
  12343 Harris J S                   1 F   Dec 26
   3506 Hassen H                     7 G  July 18
   3274 Hatch J S                    3 G  July 13
   6112 Hatch S, S’t                 8 F   Aug 19
   9311 Heath B                      3 F  Sept 20
   4174 Heninger ——                 19 -  July 28
  12349 Hopes H                     19 D   Dec 27
   7474 Howard D H                  17 D  Sept  1
   3844 Howe Samuel W                1 K  July 23
   7186 Hoyt A D                     3 K   Aug 29
   3237 Hudson W                    17 E  July 12
   8797 Hughes Wm                   31 K  Sept 15
   9652 Humphrey ——             C    3 L  Sept 24
   3484 Hunkey E B                   1 L  July 17
   4703 Henly D                      8 G   Aug  4
   5355 Ingols L                    16 H   Aug 11 64
   9389 Ingerson P                   7 I  Sept 20
  11489 Jackson A J                 17 I   Oct 26
  10619 Jackson R                    7 B   Oct 10
  10710 Jackson R W                  7 D   Oct 11
  12602 Jerdan J                    19 F   Feb  6 65
   7385 Johnson B                    7 K   Aug 30 64
   5849 Jones Wm                    19 E   Aug 16
  10243 Jory G F                     8 F   Oct  3
  11586 Kellar J                    19 J   Oct 28
   8237 Kelley L                    11 D  Sept  9
   3313 Kennedy W                   17 G  July 14
   6169 Kilpatrick C                 3 C   Aug 19
   5366 Land C                       6 I   Aug 11
   8350 Lamber W                    17 K  Sept 10
  11707 Levitt H                    19 A   Nov  1
   7967 Lincoln A                   16 I  Sept  6
  10931 Littlefield C          Cav   1 F   Oct 14
   6340 Lord Geo H                   3 B   Aug 21
   5549 Ludovice F                  13 F   Aug 13
    490 Lowell B                     4 G April 12
   9426 Macon L                      8 A  Sept 21
    709 Malcolm H M                 16 A April 24
   6606 Marshall B F                 1 H   Aug 23
  12122 Maston A                    19 D   Nov 22
  10392 Mathews James               32 F   Oct 14
  12011 Maxwell J                    8 E   Nov 14
   3679 McFarland G                  3 G  July 21
   9538 McGinley J                   7 A  Sept 22
   2200 McKinney G                   3 I  June 19
  12084 McFarland E S                8 I   Nov 18
   4391 Metcalf Oliver               8 H  July 31
  12768 McFarland W, Cor            19 K   Mch 13
   5200 Melgar J                     7 -   Aug 10
   5614 Messer C R                   7 F   Aug 14
   9399 Miller C J             Cav   1 B  Sept 21
   2002 Miller J O                   2 D  June 15
   7573 Mills M                      1 -  Sept  2
   2808 Moore Charles W              8 B  July  3
  11042 Moore G                     18 D   Oct 17
   7273 Moore J D              Cav   1 B   Aug 30
   6940 Moore W C                    7 A   Aug 26
   8118 Moyes F                     32 F  Sept  8
   7046 Newton C                     9 K   Aug 27
   1507 Nickerson D                  4 F   May 31
   8020 Nolton H                     7 B  Sept  6
   2131 O’Brien W                   16 A  June 18
   6325 Opease S                    19 -   Aug 21
    143 Osborn A J                   8 -   Mch 24
  10866 Owens O H                   10 -   Nov  6
   3710 Parker A               Cav   1 E  July 21
   7979 Parsons James W             16 D  Sept  6
   9362 Patrick F                   14 F  Sept 20
   2272 Peabody F S, S’t             5 I  June 20
  12543 Pequette P                   4 G   Jan 28 65
   1486 Perkins D              Cav   1 I   May 31 64
   5197 Perkins T                    1 H   Aug 10
   6911 Peters H                     4 E   Aug 26
  12056 Phillbrook F           Art   1 A   Nov 17
   2064 Phelps W H             Cav   1 H  June 16
   3436 Pinkham U W            Art   I A  July 17
   1361 Pottle A E             Cav   1 -   May 25
   5698 Pratt A M               “    1 L   Aug 15
   8441 Pulerman G                  16 D  Sept 11
  12410 Prescott C                  19 H   Jan  7 65
   7785 Richardson C                31 L  Sept  4 64
   6762 Richardson J K               8 G   Aug 24
  10465 Richardson W, Cor       C    1 B   Oct  7 64
   5522 Ricker Wm, Cor          C    1 D   Aug 13
   8480 Ridlon N                     7 D  Sept 11
    900 Riseck R                     3 I   May  5
   3921 Roberts H                   19 K  July 25
   5236 Rowe L                       1 A   Aug 10
    166 Rosmer Frank                 4 C   Mch 26
   5796 Ruet H                       2 H   Aug 15
   8557 Russell G A            Cav   1 E  Sept 12
   5450 Sampson E                    1 F   Aug 12
   4532 Sawyer Enos            Art   1 H   Aug  2
   3182 Sawyer John                 31 K  July 11
  11462 Shorey S               Cav   1 K   Oct 20
   2243 Simmons G F                  6 K  June 20
   3159 Smith W                      9 K  July 11
   3331 Smith W A                    6 F  July 14
   1782 Snowdale F                   4 C  June 10
   9974 Snower S C                  19 A  Sept 28
   1998 Springer H W                36 A  June 15
   4596 Steward G                   20 H   Aug  3
  11562 St Peter F                  19 F   Oct 27
   7001 Swaney P                    19 F   Aug 27
    199 Swan H B, Cor                3 F   Mch 28
   1936 Swan F                       3 F  June 14
   8682 Thompson F                   9 E  Sept 13
  10455 Thompson John                3 E   Oct  7
    621 Thorn E                      9 I April 19
  10928 Toothache J                  7 G   Oct 14
   1106 Turner C C                   4 E   May 15
   5090 Tufts J                     32 C   Aug  8
  11875 Taylor G                     9 C   Nov 16
  12322 Tuttle D L                  32 F   Dec 20
  12196 Tuttle L S, Cor             32 F   Nov 30
  12706 Thorndie W B, Cor           19 I   Mch  2 65
   6245 Valley F                    32 K   Aug 19 64
   3335 Venill C                    32 G  July 15
   7226 Walker A B, Cor              1 K   Aug 29
   3894 Walker M C                   5 I  July 24
   7722 Wall A                 Cav   1 K  Sept  4
   5942 Walsh Thomas                20 H   Aug 17
   6750 Watson B                     7 K   Aug 24
  10558 Webber Oliver                3 A   Oct  9
   4559 Whiteman A M, Cor            5 I   Aug  2
   1648 Whitcomb T O                 4 F  June  5
   6251 Whittier J K P              32 C   Aug 19
  10445 Willard W                   20 B   Oct  7
   7711 Williams C                   6 G  Sept  3
   6900 Wilson George               32 C   Aug 26
   3639 Wilson G W                  16 H  July 20
   3132 Willey D H                  19 E  July 10
   3860 Winslow E I                  4 B  July 24
   5512 Winslow N L                  4 K   Aug 13
   6372 Wyman A                     32 C   Aug 21
   2095 Wyman J                     16 A  June 17
  12470 Wyer R                       3 K   Jan 16 65
  12043 Wright C                     1 G   Nov 16 64
    178 Young E W, S’t               3 H   Mar 26
   6369 Young J                      3 H   Aug 21
   8140 Young J, Cor                 8 I  Sept  8
    TOTAL 233.


MARYLAND.

    850 Allen W H                    1 H   May  3 64
   1028 Anderson Wm                  2 C   May 11
   1379 Aikens A               Cav   1 I   May 26
   1928 Adams Jas T                  6 H   May 14
  10288 Abbott D E                   2 D   Oct  4
   2325 Archer H                     1 I   Dec 24 64
    112 Babb Samuel                  8 I   Mch 23
    288 Berlin Jas             Cav   2 F April  1
    472 Beltz W W                    2 H April  9
   1086 Bowers A                     1 I   May 14
   1455 Brown Augustus               2 G   May 29
   1487 Braddock Wm                  2 D   May 30
   1549 Buck H                 Cav   1 B  June  2
   1644 Buckley Geo                  9 B  June  5
   2404 Bennett C B                  1 D  June 24
   3268 Brant D B                    2 H  July 13
   4602 Betson James           Bat   1 A   Aug  3
   5261 Ball J A                     2 B   Aug 10
   3525 Brown J C              Art   1 B   Aug 23
   6540 Brown E R                    2 C   Aug 13
   7727 Brown E                      2 D  Sept  3
   8975 Buckley A M                  1 B  Sept 17
   1184 Beale R                Cav   1 D  Sept 19
  11761 Buckner George               2 K   Nov  3
  11620 Bell J R                     8 D   Oct 28
  12373 Bloom J, Cor                 7 F   Jan  1 65
  12679 Book C                       8 G   Feb 19
     54 Carpenter Wm           Cav   2 I   Mch 17 64
    304 Cook Lewis                   9 E April  1
    469 Coombs E A                   9 I April  9
    524 Carter Wm                    2 C April 13
    728 Cary W H                     9 F April 25
   1357 Carl J M                     6 E   May 25
   1371 Cabbage C H                  2 H   May 25
   2012 Cullin John                  2 D  June 15
   4182 Crasby M                     1 G  July 28
   4620 Carter John                  2 C   Aug  3
   5036 Carr Wm                Cav   1 D   Aug  8
   5063 Childs G A                   9 I   Aug  8
   5826 Crisle J                     6 G   Aug 16
   8008 Crouse W A        Cole’s C   - E  Sept  9
   8035 Conway Wm E                  - E  Sept  6
   8266 Crabb H                      4 E  Sept  9
   8357 Coon H S                     1 E  Sept 10
   8618 Crouse J A             Cav   1 A  Sept 13
  10600 Collins D                    1 C  Sept 10
  12395 Callahan P                   1 F   Jan  4 65
    181 Duff Chas, Cor               8 A   Mar 27 64
   1410 Dunn John, Cor               9 H   May 27
   2396 Davis Thomas                 9 -  June 24
   3912 Drew C                      35 B  July 24
   4138 Dennis Benj                  2 A  July 28
   4211 Davis G                Cav   1 F  July 29
   6510 Dickwall Wm                  2 F   Aug 22
   8199 Deller F                     1 E  Sept  8
   6788 Dennissen T                 42 I   Aug 25
   8428 Ellis C                      4 D  Sept 12
  10410 Eli W                        7 C   Oct  6
   3849 Fecker L                     2 I  July 24
   1321 Fairbanks J E                9 C   May 23
   2559 Francis J, Cor               2 K  June 27
   2600 Flage F J                    2 H  June 28
   2824 Farrass Jas                  7 G  July  2
   6016 Frantz F                     2 H   Aug 17
   7404 Fink L                       2 H   Aug 31
   9290 Frederick J E                9 I  Sept 19
  12752 Freare W                     8 A   Mar 10 65
   1271 Gordon A B                   9 E   May 22 64
   2138 Gerard Fred            Cav   1 B  June 18
   3013 Green Thomas                 2 D  July  7
   3789 Gregg F                      2 I  July 22
   6072 Gilson J E, S’t        Cav   1 C   Aug 18 64
   6731 Ganon J W                    2 K   Aug 24
  12735 Goff John                    1 I   Mar  6 65
   1767 Honck J, Cor                 2 H April 27 64
    826 Hickley John                 9 G   May  1
   1625 Howell L H             Cav   1 M  June  4
   1720 Hoop H                       2 I  June  8
   2657 Hickley J S                  2 H  June 23
   2494 Hidderick H                  1 I  June 26
   2978 Hite J E                     2 I  July  7
   3864 Hering P, S’t                2 C  July 24
   4767 Hank Thomas            Bat   1 D   Aug  5
   5292 Hilligar ——                  1 E   Aug 11
   5408 Hood John                    8 C   Aug 12
   5917 Holmes L                     2 H   Aug 17
   6484 Hour S                       8 E   Aug 22
   6504 Harris J E                   1 A   Aug 22
   7434 Hazel J                      9 C  Sept  1
   8165 Himick F               Cav   1 E  Sept  8
   8398 Hall J                       7 D  Sept 10
   9932 Holden J R                   9 C  Sept 28
  11109 Hakaion F                    2 K   Oct 18
  12422  Hoover J               Cav  2 C   Jan  9 65
   2895 Isaac Henry                  2 H  July  4 64
     93 Jones David            Bat   1 A   Mar 22
    669 Jenkins M                    2 A April 22
    460 Keplinger J                  2 H April  9
    544 Keefe Lewis                  7 F April 14
   7242 Kirby J                      9 F   Aug 29
   1019 Laird Corbin           Cav   1 F   May 11
   1056 Lees W H                     2 C   May 13
   3913 Louis J, S’t                 2 B  July 24
  11385 Little D               Cav   2 K   Oct 24
  12361 Lebud J                Cav   1 D   Dec 30
  12667 Lambert W                    1 I   Feb 17 65
    206 McCarle James          Cav   1 B   Mar 28 64
    471 Moland B                     2 F April  9
    896 Myers Noah                   9 G   May  5
   1190 McGuigen S K           Bat   1 D   May 18
   1307 Myers L S                    1 B   May 23
   1797 Moore Frank                  9 A  June 10
   1898 Moffitt Thomas               6 -  June 13
   2059 Martz G H                    2 H  June 16
   3429 Machler C S            Bat   1 A  July 17
   3797 McKinsay Jno                 2 I  July 22
   4051 Miller F                     6 C  July 27
   4146 Mathers F                    8 G  July 28
   4881 Macomber John C              1 B   Aug  6
   5170 Marvin J                     2 H   Aug  9
   6757 Moon J J                     1 D   Aug 25
   7281 McCullough J                 1 I   Aug 30
   7327 McLamas J                    7 C   Aug 30
   8043 Markell S                    2 H  Sept  6
  10150 Munroe J, Cor                4 H   Oct  1
  10861 Markin W                     1 F   Oct 13
  11547 Mathews J                    8 -   Oct 27
  12608 McMiller J A                 1 E   Feb  7 65
     91 Nice Jacob             Cav   5 M   Mar 21 64
    371 Nace Harrison                9 H April 15
   9752 Norris N                     1 -  Sept 25
    153 Pool Hanson                  2 H   Mar 25
   7590 Porter G                     1 I  Sept  2
   7981 Pindiville M                 7 H  Sept  6
   5069 Papple D, Cor                2 H   Aug  8
    252 Rusk John                    9 E   Mar 30
    918 Russell A P                  2 C   May  6
   1606 Rodk Simon                   9 E  June  4
   1901 Robinson J                   9 -  June 13 64
   2850 Rynedollar Wm C              1 D  June 23
   6599 Reed Thos P            Art   1 B   Aug 23
    155 Seberger F                   9 F   Mar 25
    317 Scarboro Rob’t               9 I April  2
    478 Suffecol S                   1 I April  9
    718 Sinder John                  2 H April 24
    899 Snooks W                     9 E   May  5
   1205 Spence Levi                  9 D   May 19
   1272 Scarlett Jas                 1 D   May 22
   1926 Smith Ed, S’t                9 I  June 14
   2004 Stafford John                9 G  June 15
   2361 Shipley W                    9 G  June 23
   2489 Schineder J            Bat   1 B  June 26
   5797 Smith John             Cav   1 B   Aug 15
   6751 Shelley B                    2 F   Aug 24
   6816 Shiver G H, Cor              1 C   Aug 25
   6919 Stull G E              Cav   1 D   Aug 26
   7580 Shilling Wm                  2 K  Sept  2
   7833 Stolz ——                     7 K  Sept  4
   8296 Smitzer J                    1 D  Sept  9
   8716 Segar Chas                   6 F  Sept 14
   9309 Snyder F                     2 K  Sept 20
   9451 Stratten J A           Art   1 C  Sept 21
  10215 Shafer J N             Cav   1 A   Oct 22
  11159 Samon L W                    1 I   Oct 19
  11160 Speaker H                    1 F   Oct 19
  12195 Spaulding J                  4 C   Nov 29
  12704 Smith G C                    1 I   Feb 26 65
    149 Tyson J T                    9 D   Mar 25 64
   1022 Tysen J T                    9 I   May 11
    677 Turner Wm F            Cav   1 D April 22
   1029 Turner A               Cav   1 B   May 11
   1356 Tindle E, Cor                9 G   May 25
   1377 Turner C                     9 E   May 26
   7872 Thompson J                  13 I  Sept  5
   8689 Thompson John                2 S  Sept 14
   9246 Tucker ——                    2 D  Sept 19
   9335 Tindell Wm                  11 B  Sept 20
  11450 Tilton J               Cav   1 F   Oct 25
   1583 Ulrich Daniel                9 I  June  3
   1305 Veach Jesse                  2 H   May 23
   8269 Viscounts A J          Art   1 E  Sept  9
     78 Wise John                    9 D   Mar 20
     21 White Wm                     9 C   Mar  7
    553 Widdons D                    1 E April 14
    537 Webster Sam’l, Cor           9 G April 17
   1171 Wharton Samuel               2 F   May 17
   2275 Worthen Wm                   9 C  June 20
   4748 West M                       4 D   Aug  5
   9409 Weaver George                1 B  Sept  2
  11578 Witman D                    13 D  Sept 28
  12147 Wolfe H                      1 B   Nov 24
    455 Yieldhan R                   9 C April  9
   1060 Zeck Wm J, Cor               7 E   May 13
   3223 Zimmerman C                  9 E  July 12
    TOTAL 194.


MASSACHUSETTS.

  11286 Adams I B                   16 G   Oct 22 64
   9561 Adams S B                   18 G  Sept 23
   6360 Akers H H                    2 I   Aug 21
   4290 Aldrich H                   36 G  July 30
  10973 Aldrich H W                 27 I   Oct 15
   5650 Alger W A, Cor              15 D   Aug 14
   8730 Allen Francis          Art   1 M  Sept 14
   5334 Allen G H                    2 E   Aug 11
   9748 Allen John                  19 B  Sept 25 64
   2286 Ames H                      35 A  June 25
   8349 Ames M L                    32 G  Sept 10
   8373 Analstine ——                54 -  Sept 10
   1084 Anchey J                    61 F   May  4
   8589 Armington H                 13 C  Sept 12
  10693 Armstrong G                 28 A   Oct 11
   9781 Atmore C               Cav   2 A  Sept 25
   4065 Avery John W           Art   1 G  July 27
   5372 Avigron F                   56 I   Aug 11
  10767 Bacey Wm                    27 H   Oct 12
   7116 Baggard F              Art   1 B   Aug 28
   8338 Baice G A                   27 G  Sept 10
   6624 Barley R                    20 A   Aug 23
   6785 Baker E E                   34 C   Aug 25
  11435 Baldwin W                   35 A   Oct 24
   9078 Banner M                    20 B  Sept 17
    642 Barge Henry                 20 E April 20
   6974 Barnes L A                  19 F   Aug 27
   1697 Barnes W L            Cav    2 M  June  7
   7858 Barlen E F                  18 E  Sept  5
   3841 Barnsh John                 17 H  July 28
   6952 Barnett G H                 25 G   Aug 26
   8848 Bassett B C            Art   1 I  Sept 15
   4355 Batten Geo C, S’t       A    2 G  July 31
   8603 Baxten H Art                 2 G  Sept 12
   2525 Bear G W                    56 I  June 26
   6386 Beannian Wm            Art   2 G   Aug 21
   6499 Beary Henry                 59 B   Aug 22
   3801 Beels H                     59 C  July 22
   8110 Bell Wm                Cav   2 M  Sept  7
   8442 Bemis Albert                57 B  Sept 11
  11955 Berry George                18 K   Nov 10
   6403 Besson Wm              Cav   2 H   Aug 21
   8657 Biglow G                    34 E  Sept 13
   5321 Biglow John                 22 F   Aug 11
   2908 Black James                  9 E  July  5
    109 Blanchard Oscar         C    2 E   Mar 23
   4067 Blanchard O S               52 G  July 27
   3337 Blair J W                   27 C  July 15
   3973 Blair D                     27 B  July 25
  10753 Blake Wm                    19 C   Oct 12
   7166 Blodgett A Z                34 A   Aug 29
    137 Blood T B                   18 F   Mar 24
    470 Bodge S D                   18 D   Aug  1
   3030 Bosworth H                  25 B  July  8
   7466 Bowler H A              Art  1 C  Sept 10
  12013 Boyd F                      18 A   Nov 10
   1796 Boynton Henry               32 A  June 10
   1857 Bracketts L                 23 C  June 12
   4059 Brackin Dennis              46 -  July 27
   6512 Bradford J              Cav  2 F   Aug 22
   3178 Brady F                     27 G  July 11
  11902 Bradish F                   19 B   Nov 11
  12030 Branagan C              Art  2 H   Nov 15
   4070 Brand S C                   57 K   Oct 12
   2565 Briggs W                Art  2 G  July  2
    993 Briggs W W                  36 H   May 10
   8799 Bromley A                    1 K  Sept 15
    465 Broadley James              17 A April  9
   3587 Bronagan M                  17 E  July 19
  11932 Brotherton W H, C           29 G   Aug 26
   2641 Brown A                     56 D  June 29
   6057 Brown D                     18 K   Aug 18
   6177 Brown J                     25 A   Aug 19
   9660 Brown J                     11 E  Sept 24
  10819 Brown John, Cor             57 E   Oct 12
   7440 Brown L                     27 I  Sept  1 64
   8780 Brown Samuel                56 E  Sept 14
   5339 Brown Wm               Art   2 H   Aug 11
   6842 Brownell A G                58 B   Aug 25
   6903 Bryant W A             Art   2 H   Aug 26
   7758 Buchanan J                  27 A  Sept  4
   5775 Buldas L                    56 I   Aug  9
  10746 Bullen J W                  60 C   Oct 11
  11517 Bubler J W                  40 C   Oct 26
   1784 Bullock W D                 24 K  July 22
  11154 Burns W H, Cor         Art   2 H   Oct 19
   2007 Burt C E, S’t          Art   2 K  July  5
   7134 Burgan L                    25 G   Aug 28
   3699 Burgess W F                 16 H  July 21
   5540 Burnhan J                   12 I   Aug 13
   7777 Burton John                 19 E  Sept  4
   2429 Butler A                    72 H  June 24
   4956 Buxton Thos            Art   1 G   Aug  7
   9868 Byerns I               Art   1 I  Sept 27
   7230 Callihan J                  57 B   Aug 29
   3158 Callihan P                  57 A  July 11
  12663 Campbell D A                15 G   Feb 16 65
   4081 Carr Wm, Cor           Art   1 H  July 27 64
    456 Carroll J              Art   2 D   Aug  1
   4366 Carroll O J            Art   2 G  July 31
   4168 Casey M                     28 C  July 28
   4509 Casey M                     17 H   Aug  2
   4226 Castle M                    22 H  July 29
   6724 Caughlin B                  56 E   Aug 24
   7070 Caswell James               18 F   Aug 18
   7313 Chase John                  25 F   Aug 30
   8686 Chase M M              Art   2 G  Sept 13
   6230 Child A F              Cav   1 E   Aug 20
   3344 Chiselson P            Cav   1 B  July 15
   1684 Church W H             Cav   1 E  June  6
   2416 Churchill F J               39 G  June 24
   7674 Chute A M                   23 B  June 11
   4516 Claflin F G            Art   1 F   Aug  1
  11178 Claug J H              Art   1 E   Oct 19
   3016 Clansky J, Cor              17 E  July  7
  10099 Clark ——, Cor               27 A  Sept 30
   3648 Clark E                     27 H  July 20
   4295 Clark George                16 I  July 30
   6492 Clark S                     27 I   Aug 27
   7928 Clemens J                   19 B  Sept  5
  12825 Cloonan P              Art   1 E April  7 65
   5315 Coffin A R             Cav   2 M   Aug 11 64
  11590 Cohash John                 23 I   Oct 28
   8099 Cole W H                    16 K  Sept  7
      8 Coleman Leonard         C    1 A   Mar  5
  10773 Coalman C S                 37 I   Oct 12
  11853 Collins A J            Art   2 D   Nov  6
   6714 Collins C R                 27 D   Aug 24
   5409 Colt J                      20 K   Aug 12
   9081 Colyer B               Art   1 G  Sept 18
   6062 Coney C W              Art   1 L   Aug 18
   6591 Congden E              Cav   2 G   Aug 23
   9332 Connell J D                 24 E  Sept 19
   1848 Conner D                    17 H  June 11
   6673 Conner John                 11 F   Aug 24
  11892 Conner P               Cav   2 H   Nov  7
  11575 Conner F                     9 C   Oct 28
   4547 Conlin Tim             Art   1 L   Aug  2
   7593 Cook W H                    37 H  Sept  2
   8841 Coombs Geo             Art   2 -  Sept 15
   1088 Coones J M             Cav   1 E   May 14
  11174 Copeland J                  15 D   Oct 19
   7802 Corbet W M             Art   1 M  Sept  4 64
   4210 Cox D O                     59 F  July 29
    687 Cox Joseph                   7 G   May 23
  11030 Cox P, S’t             Art   1 G   Oct 16
   4483 Crockett A W                17 K   Aug  1
    174 Crofts E P                  17 E   Mar 26
   7619 Cromian John           Art   1 E  Sept  2
   9026 Crowninshield T             37 I  Sept 17
   6812 Crosby E                    40 A   Aug 25
     15 Cross Ira M                 16 G   Mar  6
   3592 Cross Geo W            Art   1 L  July 19
   5248 Crosser E P                  9 C   Aug 10
   5150 Crossman E J                20 L   Aug  9
   1290 Cummings A B, S’t           29 C   May 22
   3746 Culligan Jos           Cav   2 A  July 22
    574 Cunell H G                  39 C April 16
   7853 Curren F                    58 I  Sept  5
   1869 Cushing C E                 12 -  June 12
  10172 Cutler C F             Art   2 G   Oct  1
   3579 Dalber S A                  17 B  July 19
    787 Daly John                   28 F April 28
   9421 Davis C                     27 B  Sept 21
   7180 Davis C A                   58 I   Aug 29
   1518 Davis Thomas           Cav   1 H   May 31
  12037 Davidson W                  27 H   Nov 16
   7239 Day D B                     25 -   Aug 29
   2390 Decker C               Art   1 E  June 24
  11763 Delano E                    19 E   Nov  3
   7848 Densmore Wm                  9 F  Sept  4
   6883 Dewry L A                   27 C   Aug 26
   4042 Dexter G               Cav   2 M  July 27
   7069 Dill Z                      58 A   Aug 28
  10964 Dimmick Geo H               27 I   Oct 15
   8430 Dodge Thos A           Cav   1 A  Sept 11
   3059 Downing G              Bat  14 -  July  9
   5501 Doggett L                   22 L   Aug 13
   9577 Dolan J                Cav   1 D  Sept 23
   8732 Dole Charles H              10 H  Sept  4
   6676 Dones S M                   58 A   Aug 24
  12004 Douglass B                  10 H  Sept 14
  12829 Dow H A, Cor           Art   1 E April 10 65
   3078 Dowlin J                    27 H  July 20 64
   1677 Downey Joel            Art   2 M  June  6
   2676 Drake E C                   57 E  June 30
  12773 Drake T                      4 D   Mar 14 65
   7115 Dansfield John              19 E   Aug 28 64
   5856 Drawn George                32 C   Aug 16
   2717 Drickarm L             Cav   1 K  July  1
   8294 Dromantle W                 25 G  Sept  9
   3570 Drum R                      19 G  July 19
   9251 Duffey J               Art   2 H  Sept 19
   1512 Duffey James                13 A   May 31
   4613 Dull W                 Art   2 H   Aug 31
  11666 Dunmett S                    4 D   Oct 30
  10660 Dunn J                 Art   2 G   Oct 11
  11319 Dunn I                      20 H   Oct 22
   4471 Dunn P                 Art   2 H   Aug  1
   4964 Dyer G W               Art   2 H   Aug  7
   8212 Eaff N                      56 H  Sept  8
   8616 Earl G W, S’t          Art   1 I  Sept 13
   8157 Eastman D                   35 I  Sept  8
  10000 Eaton F W                    5 D  Sept 29
   7284 Edes W, Cor                 11 F   Aug 20
  11809 Edwards C                   19 A   Nov  4
   6374 Edwards C F            Art   2 H   Aug 21
    171 Eagan Charles               17 K   Mar 26
  10822 Eibers Henry                19 -   Oct 12
   6994 Emerson G W                 57 A   Aug 27 64
    418 Emerson Wm                  12 D April  7
   5619 Emery J                Art   1 F   Aug 14
   5539 Emmerson F F           Art   1 B   Aug 13
   3300 Empay Robert                25 E  July 14
  10542 Emusin D G                  21 B   Oct  8
   5236 Evans H                Cav   1 K   Aug 10
   2785 Evans J                     17 H  July  2
   7889 Ester W A              Art   1 A  Sept  5
   4399 Evarts T P             Art   2 G  July 31
   8556 Farmer G S, S’t        Art   1 H  Sept 12
  11908 Farralle G                  19 K   Nov  7
   9443 Farisdale H            Art   1 G  Sept 21
   3926 Fearing J I             “    1 F  July 25
   4987 Feamley Wm                  25 E   Aug  7
   6450 Fegan John             Art   2 H   Aug 21
  12812 Fellows H                   15 E   Mar 19
   7803 Felyer Wm                   20 E  Sept  4
   7611 Fenis J                Cav   1 C  Sept  2
   5795 Fields E                    37 F   Aug 15
  11401 Finjay W               Cav   1 K   Oct 24
   6723 Finigan B                   19 -   Aug 24
   3974 Fisher CB              Art   2 G  July 25
    441 Fisher John            Cav   2 E   Apr  9
   3451 Flanders Chas          Art   1 E  July 17
    286 Fleming M                   17 E   Apr  1
   2476 Floyd Geo E            Art   2 H  June 25
   4187 Forbs H                Art   1 B  July 28
     70 Fosgate Henry S             17 K   Mar 19
   5649 Fowler Saml            Art   1 M   Aug 14
  10601 Frahar P                “    2 D   Oct 10
  11135 Fraser L                    20 C   Oct 18
   3848 Fray Patrick                17 C  July 24
   4267 Frederick C                 20 A  July 29
   8186 Frisby A                    12 G  Sept  8
   9502 Frost B                     16 H  Sept 21
  10205 Frost B                     16 H   Oct  2
   7170 Fuller A               Cav   2 G   Aug 29
  12681 Fuller H                    15 E   Feb 20 65
   5467 Fuller S                    27 D   Aug 13 64
   7392 Fuller Geo A           Art   2 G   Aug 31
   7154 Funold C G                  23 G   Aug 29
   9304 Gadkin G H                  21 H  Sept 22
   4333 Gaffering John              11 F  July 30
   8927 Galligher F                 18 B  Sept 19
   2787 Galse I E, Cor              27 B  July  2
   7569 Gardner D                   25 E  Sept  2
  12620 Garland W              Art   1 M   Feb 10 65
   8882 Gannan E                “    2 -  Sept 16 64
  11470 Gay C                  Cav   1 K   Oct  6
   7910 Gay Geo C              Art   2 G  Sept  5
   8312 Gibson D E                  33 F  Sept 10
   8364 Gibson H H                  25 B  Sept 10
   4464 Gifford J                   40 A   Aug  1
   4250 Gilbert S              Art   2 H  July 29
    159 Gilchrist J R, Cor          17 A   Mar 25
  11157 Gilliland J                 17 H   Oct 19
   7110 Gilsby P                    36 G   Aug 28
  10918 Glancey P                   59 A   Oct 18
   9471 Goanney G              Art   2 G  Sept 21
   2414 Godbold F A                 29 K  June 24
   3585 Gooding N                   54 C  July 19
   9202 Goodman J                   25 -  Sept 18
   5983 Goodman S              Art   2 B   Aug 17
   9817 Goodridge G J           “    1 F  Sept 25
  12844 Gonier D                     4 D   Apr 23 65
    179 Gordon Charles              17 C   Mar 26 64
   3486 Gordon W L             Art   2 H  July 17 64
  10501 Goriche H               “    2 G   Oct  8
    893 Gould Wm                    17 G   May  5
   8092 Gore J                 Art   4 G  Sept  7
   8339 Gowen J                     11 C  Sept 10
   7885 Grant Geo W            Art   1 E  Sept  5
   8277 Grant J                     15 E  Sept  9
  10491 Grant Wm                    15 E   Oct  7
   8898 Gray C                      28 D  Sept 16
   2018 Green John                  18 A  June 15
   9417 Gayson C W                  25 I  Sept 21
   3166 Guild C                Art   2 C   Aug  9
  12568 Guilford J              “    1 I   Feb  1 65
  10108 Gutherson G             “    1 B  Sept 30 64
   3056 Haggert P, Cor         Cav   2 M  Sept  7
   7408 Haley Wm                    16 F   Aug 31
    151 Halstead J W, Cor       C    2 M   Mar 25
  11086 Hall G H               Art   1 E   Oct 18
   1742 Hamlin H P             Cav   2 M  June  8
   9342 Hammond G, Cor              77 G  Sept 19
   7374 Handy Geo              Art   1 K   Aug 31
  10126 Handy Moses                 59 A   Oct  1
   8273 Hane J H               Art   1 I  Sept  9
   8804 Hanks Nelson                98 D  Sept 15
   6582 Hanley M               Cav   1 L   Aug 23
  12276 Hare F                      27 H   Dec 13
   8697 Harding C                   58 G  Sept 14
    556 Harrison Henry              12 I   Apr 14
   7626 Hamesworth F                27 A  Sept  2
   3901 Harrington F                12 H  July 24
   7957 Hart W                      15 G  Sept  6
   6923 Hartret M                   34 I   Aug 26
    766 Harty Jno, Cor         Cav   2 M   Apr 27
   3505 Harvey S J             Art   2 G  July  7
  10024 Hash Wm                 “    1 H  Sept 29
   3242 Hay Wm                  “    2 H  July 13
   5789 Haymouth N             Cav   2 M   Aug 15
   4209 Haynes Chas E          Art   2 H  July 29
   9604 Hayes P                     37 A  Sept 23
   3508 Heart John                  28 G  July 18
   7416 Hebban Thomas               28 B   Aug 31
   3168 Henrie E W                  17 H  July 14
   5606 Henry D                     16 H   Aug 14
   4604 Henry J                Art   2 K   Aug  3
   1093 Hermans John                11 G   May 24
   7297 Hervey Geo W, Cor           33 I   Aug 30
   6242 Higgin A                    23 B   Aug 20
   4906 Hill F                       9 I   Aug  6
   1740 Hills J B              Cav   2 G  June  8
  11762 Hillman G                   16 H   Nov  3
   6056 Hines S                     59 C   Aug 10
   9223 Hitchcock J C               27 C  Sept 19
   6907 Hogan Pat              Art   2 G   Aug 26
   6067 Hogan S                     19 E   Aug 18
   9260 Hoit D                      19 B  Sept 19
   4811 Hoitt J F              Art   2 D   Aug  5
   6228 Holbrook Chas           “    2 H   Aug 20
   6826 Holden Pat              “    2 G   Aug 25
   1986 Holland P                   17 I  June 15
    905 Holland Pat                 11 C   May  5
   4816 Holmes S                    12 I   Aug  5
   8712 Holt E K               Art   1 -  Sept 14
   6716 Holt T E                    22 H   Aug 24
   8575 Howard C                    24 C  Sept 12
  10864 Howard James                59 D   Oct 13
   7025 Howe C H                    36 G   Aug 27
    222 Howe E H                    36 H   May 29
   3871 Howe John W                 24 B  July 24 64
   5973 Hubbard E                   34 B   Aug 17
  11045 Hubert G W                  27 I   Oct 17
  11960 Hunt J                      84 D   Nov 11
   4323 Hunting John W              25 I  July 30
  12299 Hartshaw L E                56 A   Dec 16
   6161 Hyde N L               Cav   2 B   Aug 19
   5470 Hyde Richard                39 E   Aug 13
   3487 Jackson N S            Art   1 K  July 17
   3501 Jackson N S                 17 K  July 17
   8429 Jackson Wm R           Cav   2 B  Sept 11
   5733 Jaquirions C                57 D   Aug 15
   2308 Jaynes H                    59 G  June 22
  10561 Jeff M                      16 I   Oct  9
   5915 Jeffrey A                   58 B   Aug 17
   9951 Jewett E                    27 I  Sept 28
  12820 Jewett G                     4 A   Apr 11 65
   5473 Johnson M                   34 G   Aug 13 64
   5850 Johnson R A                 19 G   Aug 16
   3684 Johnson Wm             Art   2 H  July 21
  10702 Jones J                     59 E   Oct 11
    603 Jones John             Cav   2 M   Apr 18
   8875 Jones N P                   32 F  Sept 16
   6054 Jones Thomas                11 A   Aug 18
   6183 Kavanaugh Jas               32 K   Aug 19
   8658 Kelly Chas             Art   3 C  Sept 13
   6579 Kelley Henry                20 E   Aug 23
   9983 Kelley M               Art   2 H  Sept 17
   6275 Kelsey E                    27 D   Aug 20
   6712 Kempton E              Art   2 G   Aug 24
   5708 Kennedy Wm                  59 F   Aug 15
   6529 Kenney J               Cav   3 G   Aug 23
   8252 Kent S                      27 H  Sept  9
  12490 Kerr Wm, S’t                56 D   Jan 20 65
   6036 Keyes J C              Art   2 G   Aug 18 64
    868 Kice Thomas            Cav   2 B   May  3
    296 Kilan M, S’t                17 I   Apr  1
   4544 Kimball A              Art   1 B   Aug  2
   1754 Kinnely F, S’t              17 E  June  9
  12813 Kluener F                   27 A   Mar 25 65
    554 Knapp David            Cav   2 M   Apr 14 64
   3842 Knight ——                   25 A  July 23
  11119 Keephart M             Art   2 E   Oct 18
   5037 Kuppy H                 “    1 K   Aug  8
   8648 Krote Huer                  20 G  Sept 13
  12549 Langley L F, S’t            28 B   Jan 28 65
   6735 Lain S                      12 I   Aug 24 64
  10885 Lane J H, S’t               23 -   Oct 13
   9738 Latham W                    25 K  Sept 25
   8835 Lathrop W O                 58 C  Sept 15
   2175 Laurens John                23 E  June 15
   9621 Leach C W                   20 I  Sept 23
   2781 Leary D                Cav   2 A  July  2
   7707 Leavey W H                  12 A  Sept  3
   7210 Lecraw W T             Art   1 G   Aug 29
   7548 Leonard W E                 59 H  Sept  2
   7725 Leonard I G            Art   1 K  Sept  3
   7798 Lewin Charles               19 I  Sept  3
   2448 Lewis F                Art   2 G  June 25
  10068 Lewis G C               “    2 G  Sept 30
   4082 Lewis L                Cav   5 L  July 27
  10750 Lewis L                Art   1 A   Oct 12
   5401 Lindsay J                   18 A   Aug 12
  12413 Liswell L                   27 F   Jan  8 65
   8748 Livingston R                39 C  Sept 14 64
   1156 Lochlen Joel           Cav   1 E   May 16
    480 Lohem E D                   18 H   Apr  9
   3163 Lombard B K                 58 A  July 11 64
  12256 Loring G                    20 A   Dec 10
  10744 London Ed                   22 G   Oct 11
   8437 Lovely Francis              25 I  Sept 11
   3217 Lovett A W                  39 E  July 12
   3175 Lowell George               22 E  July 11
   9957 Lucier J                     2 G  Sept 28
   4090 Lugby Z                Art   2 G  July 27
   8593 Lyons E                     27 I  Sept 12
   3683 Lynch John                  56 K  July 21
   7521 Macey Charles               18 I  Sept  1
   4264 Macomber J                  20 H  July 29
   4034 Mahan E                     56 I  July 26
   3383 Marintine G H               18 I  July 16
   9940 Mann N C, Saddler           16 F  Sept 28
   6220 Mansfield D R               58 G   Aug 20
    503 Marden G O                  17 I   Apr 12
   1350 Mariland W H                17 D   May 25
   7147 Marchet C                   28 F   Aug 29
   8450 Martin C M             Art   2 H  Sept 11
   6272 Maxwell M               “    1 I   Aug 20
   5060 McAllister J, Cor           17 -   Aug  8
   7823 McCaffrey J                 27 E  Sept  4
   3835 McCloud J                   56 K  July 23
   9942 McCord J G                  32 H  Sept 28
  12176 McCorner J                  19 F   Nov 27
   8905 McDarle J              Art   8 M  Sept 15
   6162 McDermott J             “    2 B   Aug 19
   4409 McDevitt Wm                 25 E  July 31
   9439 McDonald R                  18 D  Sept 21
    430 McDonnell P                  2 B   Apr  8
   7459 McDonough P, Cor            25 E  Sept  1
   1984 McGiven J                   22 K  June 15
   6375 McGovern B                  34 D   Aug 21
   2652 McGowen John           Art   2 H  June 29
   5280 McGowen Wm                  12 A   Aug 11
   4260 McGonegal R                 16 K  July 29
   5124 McGuire A                   58 D   Aug  9
   6460 McHenry Jas            Art   2 G   Aug 21
   6544 McIntyre H              “    1 K   Aug 23
  11531 McKarren E              “    1 I   Oct 26
  11849 McKenny B                   34 A   Nov  5
   6358 McKinzie George             27 I   Aug  5
   5223 McKnight B             Cav   3 G   Aug 10
   3174 McLaughlin E, S’t            9 C  July 11
  10030 McMasters ——                57 A  Sept 29
   3675 McMillan Jos                24 B  July 20
    522 McNamara                    17 I April 13
   5185 McNaury R                   27 I   Aug  9
  11381 McNulty P              Art   2 G   Oct 24
   5194 McWilliams W                77 D   Aug 10
   7586 Medren W                    20 G  Sept  2
   5808 Mehan B                Art   2 H   Aug 16
   1434 Melan A                     18 F   May 28
   9735 Melvin S               Art   1 K  Sept 25
   2269 Merritt M                   27 C  June 20
   1358 Merriman W H                17 D   May 25
   9117 Messrs W               Art   1 B  Sept 18
   9597 Mesters E                   34 H  Sept 23
   6286 Meyer ——               Cav   1 K   Aug 20
   8631 Miland John            Art   2 H  Sept 13
  11514 Millard P S                 19 G   Oct 26
   1219 Miller A                    28 F   May 19
   4329 Miller J M                  11 A  July 30
  10169 Miller L                    20 -   Oct  1
   4050 Miller Jos, S’t             57 C  July 27
   7178 Millrean M W, Cor       C    2 E   Aug 29
   9539 Milton C                    21 A  Sept 22 64
   8506 Mitchell W C                23 A  Sept 11
  11867 Mitchell F                  14 A   Nov  6
  11771 Mitchell John               19 C   Nov  3
   8343 Mittance L                  20 G  Sept 10
   4053 Mixter G L             Cav   1 E  July 27
   6235 Monroe J               Art   2 M   Aug 20
   2456 Morgan C H                  27 H  June 25
   8077 Morgan Pat                  23 B  Sept  7
   3160 Moore A                     56 C  July 11
   5490 Moore C A, Mus          A    2 N   Aug 13
  10593 Moore M                     57 A   Oct 10
   3411 Moore P                     18 F  July 16
   3990 Morris N G             Art   1 -  July 26
   1004 Morris R, S’t               28 F   May 10
   9627 Mortimer L                  19 E  Sept 24
   8272 Morton G H                  42 C  Sept  9
   5360 Morton J                    34 A   Aug 11
   6982 Moss Charles           Art   2 H   Aug 27
  12516 Moulton H                   15 F   Jan 23 65
  12619 Murdock A B, Cor            27 D   Feb  8
    321 Murley D                     9 D April  2 64
   7862 Murphy C                    17 D  Sept  5
   5488 Murphy F                    17 D   Aug 13
   1680 Murphy Michael              12 K  June  6
  12783 Murphy P                    27 H   Mar 15 65
   5041 Murray Thomas               19 A   Aug  8 64
   9241 Needham J A            Art   1 B  Sept 19
   9278 Nelson J                “    2 -  Sept 19
   7006 Newcomb J E             “    2 G   Aug 27
   9694 Nitchman A                  19 B  Sept 24
   1282 Noble David                 17 D   May 22
  12439 Norman E               Art   1 E   Jan 12 65
    350 Norton F F                  39 H April 14 64
  10058 Nottage I L                  2 F  Sept 30
   7193 O’Brien Jas            Art   2 G   Aug 29
   2509 O’Brien John                36 K  June 26
   5117 O’Connell J                  9 C   Aug  9
  12189 O’Connell J                 15 H   Nov 28
   9789 O’Connell M                  2 H  Sept 26
  11080 O’Conner Wm                 29 K   Oct 17
  11493 O’Donnell W                 11 G   Oct 26
  10592 Oliver J                    39 E   Oct 10
   4640 Oliver S E                  27 B   Aug  3
   7161 O’Neil Charles              25 B   Aug 29
   4884 O’Neil D                    25 E   Aug  6
   4975 Osborn W                    19 K   Aug  7
   5340 Packard N M                 27 C   Aug 11
   6629 Page Wm                     16 D   Aug 23
    598 Paisley Wm                  17 D April 17
  10695 Palmer T                    59 E   Oct 11
   4714 Panier J M                  17 K   Aug  4
  11059 Pantins A J                 15 H   Oct 17
   6899 Pandes L               Art   3 G   Aug 26
   7811 Parrish Chas           Cav   1 C  Sept  4
   5380 Pains F                Art   2 E   Aug 12
   1074 Parker D H                  36 C   May 13
   2327 Parsons W D                 23 E  June 22
   6860 Pasco J M                   58 D   Aug 26
   1231 Patterson H W               33 G   May 20
   8888 Payne G A                   57 H  Sept 16
   4067 Payne Wm A             Art   1 M   Aug  7
   7556 Peabody W F                 37 -  Sept  2
   6471 Peckham A P                 15 B   Aug 21
   5441 Peeto A                     36 A   Aug 12
   4003 Pennington R A          A    1 -  July 26
   9603 Perry N                Art   1 F  Sept 23
    274 Perry Samuel K              39 D   Mar 31 64
   4986 Pettie C               Art   2 H   Aug  7
   7671 Phillbrook J E              56 F  Sept  3
   7708 Phillips A                  50 B  Sept  3
  10383 Phillips L M, S’t           17 D   Oct  5
   6906 Phipps H B, Cor         A    1 B   Aug 20
   4763 Phipps M M                  27 C   Aug  4
  11079 Pierson R, S’t         Art   2 H   Oct 17
     20 Pilhuton John               11 E April 14
   5128 Piper Charles               28 G   Aug  9
   6740 Piper F                     25 E   Aug 24
   7080 Polshon F B                 17 D   Aug 28
    703 Poole Charles, Cor           - G April 23
   6583 Pratt Daniel                27 I   Aug 27
  12135 Pratt D W              Art   2 G   Nov 23
   5742 Pratt Henry                 23 C   Aug 15
   2008 Price Edward           Art   2 M  June 15
  12475 Prichard J, Cor              2 G   Jan 18 65
   5404 Prior Michael               56 I   Aug 12 64
  11975 Puffer E D                  34 A   Nov 12
   4218 Quinn James                 15 M  July 29
  12804 Quirk M J                    1 D   Mar 20 65
  12094 Ragan C, Cor                27 H   Nov 19 64
  10156 Ramstell H                  37 H   Oct  1
   5500 Rand M                 Art   2 G   Aug 13
   3358 Randall J                    2 F  July 15
     54 Raymond C                   20 I  June 12
   8072 Reed Charles           Art   2 H  Sept  7
   1725 Rensseller C N              54 C  June  8
   6122 Rapp James                  28 A   Aug 19
   2970 Reynolds N A                36 C  July  7
   3272 Rice C A J             Art   2 G  July 13
   1285 Rich C                       2 D   May 22
   4233 Rich Samuel                 27 B  July 29
   4918 Richards G                  16 I   Aug  6
   3156 Richards James              27 C  July 11
  11553 Richardson L           Art   1 G   Oct 27
   4167 Richardson S R          “    1 M  July 28
   7546 Richards Thos               20 B  Sept  2
   7199 Ridlaw James                19 C   Aug 29
  10638 Riley H J              Art   2 G   Oct 10
   8642 Riley M                     56 K  Sept 13
   7200 Ripley M A                  32 F   Aug 29
   6650 Rippon Wm                   58 G   Aug 23
   6166 Roach J                     35 F   Aug 19
  11552 Roberts J H                 18 I   Oct 27
   9448 Roberts Joseph          C    1 K  Sept 21
  12505 Roberts L                   13 F   Jan 22 65
  11699 Robinson J                  19 H   Oct 31 64
   3833 Robinson R                  27 F  July 23
   5659 Roe Wm                 Art   2 H   Aug 14
   4875 Roferty John                 2 K   Aug  6
  12393 Rome R                       1 I   Jan  4 65
   4219 Rover F                      4 E  July 29 64
   6654 Rope A R                    11 I   Aug 23
   5336 Rowe Asa               Art   1 K   Aug 11
  11521 Rowley Charles              19 K   Oct 26
   3455 Russell                     27 C  July 17
   9349 Rustar R                    27 A  Sept 19
   5987 Ruth F                      36 C   Aug 17
   6036 Ryes J C               Art   2 G   Aug 18
   5276 Sabines Edward              19 K   Aug 11
   9465 Samlett P V                  1 A  Sept 21
   8074 Sanborn G B            Cav   2 B  Sept  7
  10256 Smith C                     27 D   Oct  3
   8002 Smith C A              Art   1 C  Sept  6
   4952 Smith D H                    1 I   Aug  7
  12499 Smith E                     27 G   Jan 21 65
  11804 Smith E M                    1 D   Nov  4 64
   7158 Smith H                     57 D   Aug 29
   7443 Smith J, Cor                20 E  Sept  1
    967 Smith John                  17 K   May  8
   7538 Smith J P              Art   1 A  Sept  2
   5780 Smith J H                   19 G   Aug 15
   8184 Smith W                     23 B  Sept  8
    154 Smith W H                   12 I   Mar 25
   2304 Smith Wm                    54 -  June 22
  12748 Smith V                     57 K   Mar  6 65
   3745 Snow W                      16 E  July 21 64
  12063 Somers F                    19 G   Nov 17
   5316 Switzer L                   16 E   Aug 11
   8280 Southworth J                18 G  Sept  9
   2469 Southworth John             18 E  June 25
   2188 Spalding J                   2 E  June 19
  12160 Spar H                      19 H   Nov 25
  10342 Spellman B F           Art   2 -   Oct  4
   6179 Spence David                19 D   Aug 19
   4153 Spooner C L                 27 H  July 28
   5600 Spooner E O                 27 A   Aug 14
   4652 Spooner F                   18 A   Aug  3
   3397 Stalder E P, S’t            17 H  July 16
   9873 Stauf J                     20 D  Sept 27
   6501 Steadson W                  16 G   Aug 22
   5028 Stelle F               Art   1 J   Aug  8
   7991 Stevens H                   28 F  Sept  6
   9183 Stevens N                    1 E  Sept 18
    392 Sanborn T                   17 D April  6
   8281 Sanders F              Art   2 G  Sept  9
  10637 Sandwich J                   1 G   Oct 10
   3405 Sanford J D                 40 A  July 16
  10406 Savin J H                   34 C   Oct  6
  11888 Sawer John                  33 F   Nov  7
   4180 Sawyer S F             Art   1 B  July 28
  11203 Sayer G D                   11 I   Oct 20
   5834 Shalster S                  25 G   Aug 16
   5623 Seeley Chas H A              2 G   Aug 14
  11731 Sergeant J C                19 E   Nov  2
  11338 Shamrock I                  19 H   Oct 23
   6782 Shaw Andrew                 25 K   Aug 25
  12303 Shaw C L, Cor               15 E   Dec 18
   7827 Shea J                 Art   2 H  Sept  4
   7481 Shehan James            “    2 G  Sept  1
   2324 Sherman P H                 37 E  June 23
   8822 Sherwood F                  76 B  Sept 15
   4950 Shindler Jno           Art   1 I   Aug  7
   6602 Shore J J                    1 F   Aug 23
  10946 Short J                      2 B   Oct 14
   7735 Shults A M                  23 B  Sept  3
  10415 Shults George               28 H   Oct  6
   1458 Simmonds E                  17 D   May 29
   6957 Simons A               Art   2 M   Aug 26
   4186 Simpson D O                 34 D  July 28
   9842 Simpson W              Art   2 H  Sept 27
   6141 Sinclair A                   1 G   Aug 19
  11189 Sloan S                     20 K   Oct 19
   8375 Small Z                Art   1 G  Sept 11
  10404 Smalley J H                  2 G   Oct  6
      9 Smith Warren                12 F   Mar  5
   2881 Stevens Thomas               2 H  July  4
   1758 Stewart J                   11 H  June  9
  11291 Stewart E                   52 D   Oct 22
  12420 Stone F P                   27 A   Jan  9 65
  10181 Stone A                Art   2 H   Oct  1 64
   5957 Sullivan Jno                16 A   Aug 17
   7401 Sullivan Jno                 2 K   Aug 31 64
  10890 Sullivan M                   2 D   Oct  4
   8203 Sullivan P                   9 -  Sept  8
  10792 Sullivan P                  15 I   Oct 12
  11671 Sullivan F                  59 B   Oct 30
  12788 Sylvester D                  1 B   Mar 17 65
   8325 Sylvester E            Art   2 H  Sept 10 64
  12053 Sylvester J                  4 A   Nov 16
  11957 Tabor B                     35 C   Nov 11
  10097 Tabor F, S’t                16 E   Oct 11
   2067 Taggerd John                17 E  June 19
   3368 Taylor N                    37 D  July 15
   2515 Taylor Thos            Cav   2 G  June 26
   8805 Temerts T J, S’t           110 D  Sept 15
   4386 Tenney Wm                    3 G  July 31
   3812 Thayer J                    27 A  July 23
   8612 Thomas J               Art   2 H  Sept 13
  11123 Thomas J A                  32 G   Oct 18
   2421 Thomas J W                  56 I  June 24
  12527 Thompson C             Art   1 B   Jan 26 65
   1890 Thompson Geo                16 -  June 13 64
   4536 Thompson Geo                58 F   Aug  2
   3908 Thompson J M                27 H  July 24
   3596 Thompson W W                58 G  July 19
   4634 Tibbett A                   23 F   Aug  3
   7468 Tiffany J                    4 F  Sept  1
   6549 Tilden A                    27 B   Aug 23
   3898 Tillson C E                 29 E  July 24
   3549 Tooma Jno                   28 E  July 18
    407 Torey L                     12 H   Apr  7
   6019 Torrey C L                   7 G   Aug 17
  10131 Townley J J                  1 F   Oct  1
   9108 Travern W              Art   2 G  Sept 18
   7860 Travis H C, Cor             59 C  Sept  5
   7996 Trescutt W M                15 I  Sept  6
   8132 Turner H                    34 F  Sept  8
  12161 Tuith F                     20 F   Nov 25
   5428 Twichell J                  17 K   Aug 12
   6332 Twichell ——                 36 C   Aug 21
   9517 Usher Samuel                17 I  Sept 22
   8466 Wade A D L             Art   2 G  Sept 11
   5959 Waldon Wm                   36 B   Aug 17
  12444 Walker A                    19 F   Jan 12 65
   3377 Wallace P                   57 B  July 16 64
  11494 Walsh M                      4 C   Oct 26
   5191 Walton E A                  57 H   Aug 10
   8724 Walton Nat                  59 E  Sept 14
   8304 Wanderfelt ——                6 C  Sept 10
   1733 Wardin H                    17 I  June  8
   5217 Ware Sam                     1 H   Aug 10
   8864 Warffender J W              27 C  Sept 15
  12131 Warner A F, Cor             19 D   Nov 22
   6454 Washburne W E               27 I   Aug 21
   4721 Weiden H                    17 H   Aug  4
   1066 Welsh Frank                 17 B   May 13
   6224 Weldon Chas            Art   1 D   Aug 20
  11796 Wells S                      1 A   Nov 14
   5214 Wellington G W               2 G   Aug 10
   3547 Welworth C W                18 D  July 18
   3247 Werdier W                   58 G  July 13
   1334 West E                      24 A   May 24
   7002 West J G               Art   1 E   Aug 27
   4577 White F                     15 K   Aug  2
   6807 White Joseph           Art   2 G   Aug 25
   7188 White Joseph                 2 G   Aug 29
   7902 Whiting A                   27 H  Sept  5
   6867 Whitney F P                  1 G   Aug 26
    635 Whittaker S                 17 D   Apr 20 64
   1115 Wizard Geo                  22 A   May 15
   6715 Wilber E                    27 G   Aug 24
   4539 Wilcox A               Art  14 C   Aug  2
   5519 Wilder L E                   2 G   Aug 13
   7318 Wilkins S O                  1 G   Aug 30
    661 Williams Chas               27 G   Aug 24
    668 Williams J                  58 G  Sept 13
    469 Willis C                    17 K  July 17
   7549 Wilson J               Art   2 H  Sept  2
    769 Wilson Robert               34 A   Aug 25
   6742 Wilson S               Art   2 G   Aug 24
  10545 Wilson W                    18 B   Oct  9
     13 Witherill O                 47 C   Aug 20
   6483 Woodbury B                  17 A   Aug 21
   6564 Woodward W A                27 B   Aug 23
   6368 Wright C E                  27 B   Aug 21
   6288 Wright M E                  27 C   Aug 20
   4923 Wyman H C              Art   2 H   Aug  6
   3562 Wright W M              “    3 G  July 18
   7152 Young N C                    1 I   Aug 29
   8882 Young E                      2 -  Sept 16
   6922 Young G W              Art   2 H   Aug 26
    TOTAL 758.


MICHIGAN.

   2198 Ayres J B, S’t              22 C  June 17 64
   2247 Acker J                     22 K  June 20
   2461 Atkinson P                  22 C  June 22
   2576 Anderson George             23 E  June 27
   3257 Abbott C M                   5 E  July 13
   4947 Ammerman H H                23 A   Aug  7
   5472 Aulger George               10 F   Aug 13
   5601 Ackler W               Cav   3 C   Aug 14
   6119 Austin D                     8 C   Aug 19
   6713 Allen A A                   14 I   Aug 24
   9156 Anderson F             Cav   1 G  Sept 18
  12650 Arsnoe W                     7 E   Dec 27
  12571 Allen J                      9 H   Feb  2 65
  12606 Adams A                      4 B   Feb  7
    121 Brockway O                  11 K   Mar 23 64
   1154 Banghart J             Cav   9 G   May 16
   1283 Broman C                     4 H   May 22
   1511 Beckwith E, Cor        Cav   6 I   May 31
   1513 Bishop C                    27 F   May 31
   1664 Beard J                      6 E  June  6
   2004 Bostwick R S, Cor            2 F  June 15
   2025 Bowerman R, Cor             22 H  June 17
   2201 Bryant George          Cav   6 H  June 17
   2271 Bush Thomas                  8 A  June 20
   2303 Brigham David               22 D  June 22
   2381 Bowlin J                    27 E  June 23
   2478 Briggs I                     6 E  June 25
   2595 Berry Henry                 15 E  June 28
   2700 Broo F                      22 I  June 30
   2946 Bailey John            Cav   4 M  July  6
   3149 Briggs W H                  20 G  July 11
   3215 Bibley J                     3 C  July 12
   3479 Brannock F                   3 C  July 17
   3517 Brush J                     16 K  July 18
   3531 Bradley Geo                 17 B  July 18
   3591 Bulit F                Art   3 A  July 19
   3777 Bohnmiller J           Cav  10 H  July 22
   3798 Beardslee M A, S’t          22 D  July 22
   4109 Billiams Jno                 2 K  July 27
   4339 Binder Jno                   2 A   Aug 30
   4395 Brown G                Cav   4 E  July 31
   4810 Baker A                Cav   5 F   Aug  5 64
   5573 Betts P                      1 C   Aug 14
   8333 Brookiniger E                7 D  Sept 10
   5950 Bertan I               Cav   8 B   Aug 16
   5970 Burnett J                    7 G   Aug 17
   6013 Burkhart C, Cor             22 G   Aug 17
   6065 Brower L F, Cor             17 H   Aug 18
   6290 Bilby Geo                    9 E   Aug 20
   6388 Burcham J                    5 B   Aug 21
   6990 Burdick Theo           Cav   6 I   Aug 27
   7148 Beirs S                     18 B   Aug 29
   7227 Billingsby J           Bat   1 -   Aug 29
   7536 Bradley B              Cav   9 E  Sept  1
   7796 Blair Jno                    7 E  Sept  4
   7932 Barr W, S’t            Cav   8 L  Sept  5
   8391 Brown H S              Cav   8 F  Sept 10
   8505 Bradley E, S’t              11 K  Sept 12
   8814 Blanchard Jas                7 G  Sept 15
   8869 Brown A                      3 G  Sept 15
   9226 Beckley W              Cav   1 E  Sept 19
   9240 Brown H                     13 A  Sept 19
   9305 Beebe Jno, Cor               1 A  Sept 20
   9430 Baker Jno              Cav   1 H  Sept 21
   9545 Birdsey J                    7 D  Sept 23
   9553 Barber J M, Cor             26 C  Sept 23
   9637 Baxter S               Cav   6 L  Sept 24
   9830 Batt W H               Cav   6 L  Sept 27
   9834 Bunker R B                   1 D  Sept 27
   9853 Barnard G, Cor         Cav   7 M  Sept 27
   9866 Beekley L                   10 F  Sept 27
  10044 Barney H                    17 D  Sept 29
  10340 Blackburn Jas                5 G   Oct  4
  10490 Bentley H                   24 I   Oct  7
  10835 Bittman J              Cav   1 C   Oct 13
  11275 Baldwin L A                 24 B   Oct 22
  12130 Beck G                 Cav   1 H   Nov 23
  12162 Bennett W L                 26 G   Nov 26
  12187 Barnett I                    2 E   Nov 28
  12745 Bearves M                   15 G   Mar  7 65
     34 Colan Fred                  17 F   Feb  9 64
    210 Chilcote Jas C              20 G   Feb 28
    398 Chambers J R, S’t      Cav   5 K   Apr  5
    439 Cowill Ed               “    8 G   Apr  8
    593 Cowell John             “   10 H   Apr 15
   1037 Conrad Edson            “    8 G   May 24
   1077 Cripper G F             “    5 C   May 14
   1164 Coastner J D            “    5 L   May 16
   1330 Chapman H                    5 E   May 24
   1351 Cameron Jas, S’t            27 H   May 25
   1505 Constank John                9 B   May 31
   1692 Conkwrite John              22 K  June  7
   1711 Cook J                 Cav   4 D  June  7
   1811 Churchward A R               9 C  June 10
   1943 Clear James                 22 F  June 14
   2617 Cussick B                    7 C  June 28
   3071 Collins James                5 I  July  9
   3462 Cartney A              Cav   2 E  July 17
   3595 Cameron D, S’t          “    1 L  July 19
   3800 Cummings W                   2 F  July 22
   3989 Clements Wm            S S   1 C  July 26
   4032 Cook J                      10 F  July 26
   4620 Cronk Jas              Cav   5 G   Aug  3
   4920 Cooper J                     7 K   Aug  6
   4956 Curtis M D                   8 C   Aug  7
   5201 Crunch J               Cav   1 -   Aug 10
   5685 Cummings D              “    5 I   Aug 15
   5686 Churchill G W                3 A   Aug 15
   5905 Carr C B                    25 K   Aug 16 64
   6263 Coft Jas                    20 F   Aug 20
   6285 Cobb G                       4 D   Aug 20
   6446 Cook Geo               Cav  10 H   Aug 22
   6004 Cahon W J                    1 H   Aug 26
   7904 Carp J S, S’t                1 K   Aug 28
   7164 Caten M                Cav   7 E   Aug 29
   7496 Cling Jacob                  2 K  Sept  1
   7534 Campbell S B                 2 H  Sept  1
   7883 Coldwell W, Cor            124 H  Sept  5
   8406 Cope J B                    17 A  Sept 11
   8993 Cornice J D                  7 F  Sept 17
   9341 Carver J H             Cav   4 -  Sept 20
  10644 Cooley G                     3 A   Oct  9
  10759 Clago S, S’t                 7 C   Oct 12
  10788 Crain R O                   17 A   Oct 12
  10871 Cooley Henry                34 G   Oct 13
  11743 Collins C                    2 K   Nov  2
  11903 Clark G W, S’t         Art   1 C   Nov  7
  12143 Cameron F                   17 E   Nov 24
  12258 Cook N                       1 K   Dec 10
  12391 Case S, Cor            Cav   5 L   Jan  4 65
  12474 Coras E                 “    6 C   Jan 17
  12634 Chambers W              “    8 G   Feb 10
   1345 Davis Wilson                 8 A   May 24 64
     43 Diets Jno              Cav   6 I   Feb 14
    195 Dunay Jno                    6 C   Feb 27
    315 Deas Abe               Cav   7 L April  2
    716 Decker L                    10 H April 24
   1270 Drummond Jno                27 E   May 21
   1292 Dolf Sylvanus               27 G   May 23
   1296 Denter W A                   5 E   May 23
   1683 Dougherty D                  8 C  June  6
   2090 Demerie D              Bat   1 -  June 17
   2248 Dillingham W O, Cor         20 I  June 20
   2683 Dennison H             Cav   5 G  June 30
   2882 Dreal D                 “    2 B  July  4
   3207 Dusalt A                    17 H  July 12
   3314 Dyre Wm                     17 B  July 14
   3610 Davy R                      22 C  July 19
   3619 DeRealt F                    5 C  July 20
   4660 Decker G S, Cor        Cav   5 K   Aug  3
   4669 Darct S                      5 I   Aug  4
   4670 Dugan D                     21 I   Aug  4
   5070 Dawson D                    17 H   Aug  8
   5351 Dalzell Wm                   6 A   Aug 10
   5666 Dolph S                      8 B   Aug 14
   6225 Duinz G W              Cav   5 I   Aug 20
   6401 Denton G                     5 E   Aug 21
   7654 Derffy Wm                    1 H  Sept  3
   7769 Dumont W                    36 H  Sept  4
   8651 Daly A, Cor            Cav   7 E  Sept 13
   9995 Dyer J                       5 I  Sept 29
  10161 Doass M                Cav   1 L   Oct  1
  10922 Dixon Jno               “    5 L   Oct 14
  11125 Dennis O                     1 H   Oct 18
  12124 Dunroe P                    24 H   Oct 22
  12574 Drake O                     22 D   Feb  2 65
   2850 Egsillim P H                22 K  July  4 64
   5318 Eggleston Wm           Cav   7 E   Aug 10
   3981 Elliot J                    24 G  July 26
   1210 Eaton R                     22 H   May 19
   1240 Ellis E                Cav   2 B   May 20
   2788 Ensign J                    11 A  July  2
   7901 Edwards S                    6 E  Sept  5
   8255 Edmonds B                    1 H  Sept  9
  11065 English James               17 B   Oct 17
   5817 Everett J                   77 K   Aug 16 64
    890 Force F                     27 D   May  5
   1064 Fitzpatrick M          Cav   1 B   May 13
   1367 Folk C                      14 E   May 25
   2197 Fitse T                Cav   1 C  June 19
   2252 Fairbanks J             “   15 G  June 20
   2343 Face W H                     6 -  June 23
   4194 Fisher F                    22 G  June 29
   5081 Farmer M                    22 D   Aug  8
   5861 Flanigan John                5 D   Aug 16
   6135 Farnham A                    5 A   Aug 19
   6353 Fox James                    3 H   Aug 21
   6680 Fritchie M                  22 G   Aug 24
   6983 Fitzpatrick M                8 E   Aug 27
   7027 Fox Charles                  1 B   Aug 27
   7060 Forsythe H                   5 F   Aug 28
   7171 Forbs C                Cav   1 B   Aug 27
   8586 Fethton F               “    1 G  Sept 12
  10275 Fliflin H                   27 F   Oct  3
  11500 Freeman B              S S   1 -   Oct 26
  11709 Fredenburg F                 7 -   Nov  1
  12688 Findlater H            Cav   7 C   Feb 22 65
  12845 Frederick G                  9 G April 23
   8250 Face C                 S S   1 B  Sept  9 64
  11509 Fox W                       22 E   Oct 26
    145 Goodenough G M              23 K   Mch 25
    566 Grover Jas                  20 H April 15
    784 Grippman J             Cav   5 M April 28
    956 Graham Geo W                 5 C   May  8
   1049 Goodbold Wm            Cav   2 L   May 12
   1131 German E, Cor               13 H   May 16
   1234 Garrett S H            Cav   2 G   May 20
   1927 Grimley Jas                 22 D  June 14
   2192 Ganigan J              Cav   9 L  June 19
   2614 Gorden Jas                   1 D  June 28
   2862 Gilbert F                    3 K  July  3
   2928 Gibbons M                    6 C  July  5
   3863 Goodman W                    5 I  July 24
   4092 Griffin G                   11 H  July 27
   4225 Green E                     11 H  July 29
   5716 Galvin M                    23 I   Aug 15
   6482 Greek C H              Cav   1 K   Aug 22
   6866 Gillis Jno             Cav   4 F   Aug 26
   7476 Gaines A                    22 F  Sept  1
   7518 Guilz H                      1 A  Sept  1
   7624 Griens G D                   8 I  Sept  2
   7659 Graff Jacob                 17 H  Sept  3
   7741 Gibson J                     1 K  Sept  3
   7968 Grant A H                    7 D  Sept  6
   8628 Gray Geo               Cav   1 E  Sept 13
  10671 Gallitt L                   22 F   Oct  9
  10726 Gibbs J                      7 B   Oct 11
  11207 Gask I                 Cav   8 C   Oct 20
  11302 Gray James             Cav   6 A   Oct 22
  11352 Groucher J             Cav   6 B   Oct 23
  11647 Grabaugh J                   5 G   Oct 30
  12164 Gifford L                   61 -   Nov 26
  12443 Gowell N                    19 F   Jan 12 65
  12573 Goodel M                     5 C   Feb  2
   5818 Gurmane B S, S’t            77 K   Aug 16 64
   4511 Grasman E                   23 I   Aug  1
  12207 Gabulison J            Cav   5 F   Dec  1
      6 Hall William           Cav   2 M   Feb  5
    339 Holton S M                   1 B April 20
    367 Henry Jas                    8 A April  5
    409 Hartsell Geo           Cav   7 B April  6
    818 Hutton S               Cav   9 G April 30
    860 Hood Jas D                  22 H   May  3 64
    947 Hart J R, Cor                6 E   May  7
   1452 Hannah Jno                  22 C   May 29
   1519 Hunter F A                  22 F   May 31
   1656 Herriman D                  22 D  June  6
   1738 Huntley W              Cav   5 E  June  8
   1813 Haines R               Cav   9 G  June 10
   1904 Hough M                     22 -  June 13
   1910 Harty J S                   16 F  June 13
   2660 Hayes C                      6 H  June 29
   3015 Hardy Jno                    4 H  July  7
   3040 Hughey Jas                  17 B  July  8
   3206 Hopkins N              Cav   6 E  July 12
      4 Halson David           Cav   8 A   Mar 27
   3343 Heil H                       9 G  July 15
   3483 Honsigner W L, Cor           7 C  July 17
   3889 Hance C, Bugler              7 D  July 24
   3927 Hawkins George              12 H  July 25
   4166 Hunter M W, Cor             22 D  July 28
   4286 Heron Jno, Cor               5 F  July 30
   4426 Heath M                     21 C  July 31
   4674 Hale S B               Cav   7 D   Aug  4
   5332 Hollen Geo             Cav   1 L   Aug 11
   5370 Haynes P               Cav   1 H   Aug 11
   5376 Husted J                    10 C   Aug 10
   5556 Henrich J                    3 C   Aug 13
   5931 Hall W                      26 I   Aug 17
   6110 Holmes J F                  42 H   Aug 18
   6276 Hibler A, Cor          Cav   9 D   Aug 20
   6992 Henny A                     27 B   Aug 27
   6998 Hungerford C, S’t           20 E   Aug 27
   6999 Hunt L                       2 C   Aug 27
   8100 Holcomb J              Cav   6 K  Sept  7
   8624 Harrington G           Cav   6 D  Sept 13
   9233 Hawley C                     4 F  Sept 19
   9686 Hartman H                   29 A  Sept 24
   9968 Hinkley G C                 20 F  Sept 28
  10348 Hoag J M                    20 H   Oct  5
  11027 Hankins E                    5 E   Oct 16
  11057 Hayes Jas                    1 E   Oct 17
  11070 Haywood J B            Cav   1 H   Oct 17
  11260 Hamlin J H             S S   1 K   Oct 20
  11336 Hoag J M                    20 H   Oct 23
  11412 Hill W                 S S   1 -   Oct 24
  11480 Howard F S, S’t              8 E   Oct 26
  11593 Hawk H L, Cor               24 I   Oct 28
  11757 Hodges M, S’t               22 I   Nov  3
  11835 Hilmer C               Cav   6 M   Nov  5
  12067 Howe J                 Cav   7 F   Nov 17
  12612 Hicks C                      8 B   Feb  8 65
   9718 Harper D                     3 E  Sept 25 64
   5141 Ingraham W L           Cav   5 B   Aug  9
   1817 Jackson James                7 I  June  7
   2576 Jones A                      6 E  June 27
   3564 Jagnet E B             Cav   7 C  July 19
   3621 Jackson Geo G               22 F  July 20
   4736 Johnson J H                  7 G   Aug  4
   6578 Johnson J                   24 I   Aug 23
   7520 Jump D O                     1 A  Sept  1
   7753 Johnson H              Cav   9 L  Sept  2
   9746 Jackland C             Cav   8 E  Sept 25
   2010 Jamieson H             Cav   5 H   Nov 14
  12396 Jondro M                     1 K   Jan  5 65
  12463 Johnson A                    5 C   Jan 16
    368 King Leander                 8 G April  5 64
    488 Keintzler R            Cav   5 F April 12
    706 Karl Wm                      2 A April 24
   4140 Klunder Chas           Cav   5 F  July 28 64
   4397 Kennedy H                   27 H  July 31
   4424 Kinney John                 17 H  July 31
   4728 Kendall W                    6 D   Aug  4
   8289 Kessler J                   11 G  Sept  9
   0789 Kinsell George         Cav   5 B   Oct 12
  10908 Kenkham H C            Cav   5 E   Oct 14
  12431 Kenney C               Cav   5 H   Jan 11 65
   1882 Lewis F L              Cav   9 -  June 12 64
    223 Lossing John           Cav   8 B   Mar 29
    960 Loring Jno                  27 E   May  8
   1187 Lewis P                      5 D   May 18
   1301 Lancreed M                  14 B   May 23
     37 Lumer Jno                   17 F   Mar 28
   3303 Lanning H B                 22 H  July 14
   3700 Lyon A D, Cor          Cav   5 G  July 21
   4243 Lonsey L               Cav   1 L  July 29
   4913 Luce F                 Art   1 A   Aug  6
   4992 Lu Duc Jas                  17 G   Aug  7
   5142 Larke J A                   23 F   Aug  9
   5216 Lowell Jas             Cav   7 E   Aug 10
   5776 Laribee L                    8 H   Aug 15
   5923 Lofler E E                  17 H   Aug 17
   6667 Lord M, S’t                  3 M   Aug 24
   8085 Leamon G               Cav   8 H  Sept  7
   9685 Lard H O                    22 D  Sept 24
   9760 Lund Jas               Cav   6 H  Sept 25
  10877 Laidham G                    1 D   Oct 13
  11969 Lutz Wm                Cav   6 F   Nov 11
    218 McCartney H            Cav   6 K   Mar 29
    268 McGuire Jno                 20 A   Mar 31
    542 Markham D              Cav   5 B April 14
    612 McCarter Jas                22 H April 18
   1059 Mum A F                     27 F   May 13
   1062 Miller Chas            Cav   5 D   May 13
   1710 Miller J                     3 C  June  7
   2255 Maby Ep                Cav   8 K  June 20
   2586 McDowell J              “    8 F  June 28
   2759 McSpoulding W               22 E  July  2
   2828 Manwaring Wm                22 D  July  3
   2976 Man Thos G                   5 A  July  7
   3090 Marshall H E                27 B  July  9
   3150 Morris A T                  14 K  July  9
   3537 Marvey Andrew               17 G  July 18
   3697 Miller W E                   2 K  July 21
   3936 McCabe F                    22 H  July 25
   3954 Morgan M                     2 E  July 26
   4078 McFall H                    17 E  July 27
   4144 Miller G                     5 I  July 28
   4304 Monny Jno              Cav   5 L  July 30
   4783 Monroe D                “    6 A   Aug  4
   4942 Morgan E C                  23 G   Aug  7
   5153 Miller L                     7 F   Aug  9
   5630 Mench C, S’t                20 I   Aug 14
   6249 McCarty Chas                26 I   Aug 20
   6229 Meyers J                     6 H   Aug 21
   6820 Myer J                       4 I   Aug 25
   7114 Moore J                     27 B   Aug 28
   7269 Merrill S B                  5 G   Aug 30
   7279 McLaine Thos                 1 I   Aug 30
   7473 McCloud A                   21 I  Sept  1
   7513 Mason F                Cav   7 L  Sept  1
   7918 Martin Peter                17 H  Sept  5
   7936 Musket J               Cav   4 K  Sept  5
   7962 Miller F                    22 G  Sept  6
   8025 Munday E                    17 G  Sept  6
   8387 McClure R                    7 D  Sept  9
   8518 Miles C S, Cor         Cav   1 F  Sept 12 64
   8590 McGinis P                   16 -  Sept 12
   8050 McKay K                     10 -  Sept 6
   8876 Munson H C                  30 E  Sept 16
   8807 Morrison J                  21 F  Sept 16
   8994 Maher S L              Cav   7 I  Sept 17
   9185 Marine Wm                   22 E  Sept 18
   9750 McArthur W, S’t        Cav   7 D  Sept 25
   9791 Moore John              “    6 G  Sept 26
  10011 Moses C                 “    5 I  Sept 29
  10134 Moses A                 “    6 M   Oct  1
  10423 Migele J                     9 A   Oct  6
  10575 May Thomas             Cav   6 H   Oct  9
  10958 McMillen Alex           “    5 M  Sept 14
  11126 Miller John A               10 F   Oct 18
  11536 Molash F                     3 D   Oct 27
  11548 McMann W                    17 A   Oct 27
  11582 Mongby D                    22 C   Oct 28
  11798 Merrill C                    4 K   Nov  4
  12085 Miller H                     9 A   Nov 18
  12093 Magram J               S S   1 -   Nov 19
  12252 McCame W                     7 B   Dec  9
  12458 Morton J                     1 I   Jan 15 65
  11511 Mackswarer W           S S   1 K   Oct 26 64
  12674 Marshall G                   4 M   Feb 19 65
  12733 McNeill C              Cav   8 M   Mar  5
   3790 Major Wm                    22 D  July 22 64
   7916 Monroe John                  7 I  Sept  5
   9791 Moore John             Cav   6 G  Sept 26
   9965 McClary W               “    7 H  Sept 28
    513 Nicholson E             “    6 G April 12
   1209 Newbury James           “    - A   May 19
   2077 Nash Charles                22 H  June 17
   3343 Nail H, S’t                  9 F  June 15
   4102 Neck H                       4 K  July 27
   5092 Nirthhammer J               20 D   Aug  8
   5400 Nagle C                     11 G   Aug 11
   5493 Narrane A                   17 E   Aug 13
  11011 Noyes James E                1 -   Oct 16
  11911 Niland H                     8 D   Nov  9
   1005 Nurse H W              Cav   5 L   May 10
   9812 Northam O H                  6 M  Sept 26
    285 O’Brien Austin         Cav   9 H April  1
    499 Oliver Alex             “    8 G April 12
   1189 Orrison Geo             “    9 M   May 18
   2267 Olney G W                    4 A  June 20
   4384 Osborn S                    27 B  July 31
   4874 Overmeyer J F          Cav   6 E   Aug  6
   5574 O’Neil J                    22 K   Aug 14
   5846 Orcutt C                     3 F   Aug 16
   8141 Ornig S W                   20 C  Sept  8
   8511 O’Brian W H, S’t       Cav   7 A  Sept 12
   9011 Ogden E S               “    5 M  Sept 17
  11940 O’Leary J, Cor         S S   1 H   Nov  9
  11999 Osborn J L                   6 E   Nov 13
  12500 Oathart D                   18 C   Jan 17 65
    443 Parsons G                    7 I April  9 64
    515 Pullman Geo                  5 I April 12
   1038 Parker B C, S’t        Cav   8 C   May 12
   1276 Perigo Jno              “    2 D   May 22
   1374 Parish Thos                  6 I   May 26
   1892 Paisley A G, S’t            22 -  June 13
   1997 Payne R H                    6 I  June 15
   2533 Pilfer J               Cav   6 I  June 26
   3546 Pierson Daniel          “    3 C  July 18
   3594 Palmerly J              “    7 C  July 19
   4100 Post R L                    10 H  July 27
   4253 Pratt M                     22 E  July 29 64
   4486 Pelton A, Cor               21 A   Aug  1
   4662 Philbrook F            Art   1 -   Aug  3
   5056 Podroff D                   13 D   Aug  8
   5546 Peck J H, Cor          Cav   1 D   Aug 13
   5612 Pond C                       1 I   Aug 14
   5745 Pettibone E E                7 D   Aug 15
   4564 Porter L               S S   1 C   Aug  2
   5760 Pentecost W G               18 -   Aug 15
   5852 Palmer D                     5 D   Aug 16
   7389 Parks                        7 C   Aug 31
   7354 Perrin N               Cav   8 B   Aug 31
   7960 Parks F                 “    5 E  Sept  6
   8195 Pearmell J, Cor             23 B  Sept  8
   8636 Pike B H, Cor          Cav   2 C  Sept 13
   8986 Plant Wm                    16 G  Sept 16
   9331 Pharrett Wm                 22 D  Sept 20
  11046 Platt R                     22 A   Oct 17
  11177 Palmer P                     5 H   Oct 19
  11986 Preston B                    7 K   Nov 13
  12273 Plins Wm               Cav   5 C   Dec 12
  12409 Preston J                    6 C   Jan  7 65
  12578 Pratt L                Cav   8 C   Feb  3
  12762 Parmalee C, Cor         “    8 M   Feb 12
     77 Roloff Jno              “    5 E   Mar 20 64
    324 Russell Peter               23 G   Apr  2
    623 Rowland B                    6 M   Apr 19
    922 Robinson Wm                  2 H   May  6
   1804 Rhinehart D            Cav   5 C  June 10
   2291 Rolland J                    6 G  June 21
   2402 Ruggles O                   32 H  June 24
   3296 Rassan A                    28 I  July 14
   3732 Riley Charles                6 I  July 21
   3740 Riggs J                     22 I  July 21
   3876 Russ W J, Cor               22 C  July 24
   5176 Rood C                      22 C   Aug  9
   5885 Roman John                   5 C   Aug 16
   6154 Relu A                      17 G   Aug 19
   5707 Ryan W                       1 E  Sept  1
   7750 Robinson H             Cav   5 L  Sept  2
   7955 Rich A                      11 B  Sept  6
   8617 Riley Miles, Cor       Cav   7 F  Sept 13
   9254 Rimer J C               “    1 C  Sept 19
   9914 Ryan T                      22 I  Sept 28
  10136 Robinson T                  27 F   Oct  1
  10880 Randall H D                  6 D   Oct  5
  11151 Riley R, S’t                24 H   Oct 19
  11457 Ramsay J, S’t                5 H   Oct 25
  11675 Raley H                Cav  24 L   Oct 30
  11705 Ricott S               S S   1 K   Nov  1
  12553 Richardson M B               1 L   Jan 29 65
  12589 Rodgers W                   26 G   Feb  5
  12740 Robbins A              Cav   4 H   Mar  6
  12745 Reaves M                    15 G   Mar  8
    134 Snyder E                    17 F   Mar 24 64
    172 Smith Wm               Cav   7 L   Mar 26
    236 Soper Calvin                27 H   Mar 29
    330 Sheldon H S                  1 A   Apr  2
    520 Shannon John                20 H   Apr 13
    842 Smith W W, Cor         Cav   5 D   May  2
    854 Stillman L D                 6 M   May  3
   1082 Stuck L H              Cav   2 B   May 14
   1328 Schemerhorn J C              7 C   May 24
   1406 Samborn H                   22 K   May 27
   1446 Snow Levi                   20 H   May 28
   1626 Smith A                Cav   1 L  June  4
   1801 Smith S                     17 C  June 10
   1741 Stevens S, Cor              22 K  June  8 64
   1948 Shafer W                    22 G  June 14
   1966 Strickland Thos             10 E  June 14
   2299 Sanburn H                   22 K  June 20
   2507 Smith C                Art   1 E  June 26
   2651 Sarmyes C                   24 C  June 29
   2664 Stevens L              Cav   6 M  June 29
   2685 Stewart C A                  7 F  June 30
   2807 Sprague W B                 11 I  July  3
   2986 Shaw F N                     2 K  July  7
   3001 Steele E, S’t          Cav   2 C  July  7
   3085 Sibley J E                   1 G  July  9
   3353 Stubbs J               Cav   9 L  July 15
   3518 Simpson E T            Art   6 G  July 18
   3224 Shultz C                     5 B  July 18
   3544 Shummay Wm              C    8 L  July 18
   3942 Shaw F F                     7 D  July 25
   3951 Sharp Jas                    6 -  July 25
   4103 Stines H                     4 K  July 27
   4311 Sprague B              Cav   7 E  July 30
   4433 Sale Thos                   17 G  July 31
   4859 Smith Wm                    17 H   Aug  6
   5193 Swain D                Cav   6 H   Aug 10
   5972 Stow Geo                    10 C   Aug 17
   6323 Simpson T                    8 I   Aug 21
   6506 Simons A                    17 B   Aug 22
   6686 Smoke H B                    6 H   Aug 24
   7014 Sullivan Jno                27 E   Aug 27
   7303 Sherman Fred                22 G   Aug 30
   7350 Sayrrer J M                  1 G   Aug 31
   7528 Schofield C                 27 G  Sept  1
   7676 Satterly H J           Cav   6 E  Sept  2
   8000 Sutherland J                 1 I  Sept  6
   8580 Stanning G W, Cor      Art   5 G  Sept 12
   9100 Suthphar H W                15 F  Sept 18
   9469 Stewart F              Cav   6 E  Sept 21
   9481 Stewart W V                  5 E  Sept 21
   9629 Snyder J               Cav   5 M  Sept 24
  10080 Straut C A              “    5 F  Sept 30
  10117 Spencer Geo                 21 H   Oct  1
  10254 Sammonds A, S’t              7 E   Oct  3
  10285 Spencer John                 2 I   Oct  3
  10417 Skull Wm                     7 B   Oct  6
  10444 Simpson J P                 22 A   Oct  7
  11138 Swart M M                    3 F   Oct 19
  11148 Swesler C, S’t               5 K   Oct 19
  11234 Sutton H                    22 I   Oct 21
  11265 Strander A                   6 G   Oct 21
  11354 Stoddard S             Cav   5 F   Oct 23
  11701 Steadman S                  10 H   Oct 30
  11717 Smith S                      7 H   Nov  1
  11773 Sickles M                   14 I   Nov  3
  12020 Seeley H               Cav   6 B   Nov 15
  12225 Spondle C               “    1 C   Dec  5
  12229 Sumner H                    27 B   Dec  6
  12261 Stedman S D                 10 H   Dec 11
  12300 South Peter            S S   1 K   Dec 19
  12678 Smith C B              Cav   8 L   Feb 19 65
  12803 Smith Geo                    8 B   Mar 20
  12254 Stickner J                  16 D   Dec 10 64
  11508 Sockem A               S S   1 K   Oct 26
  11510 Springer J             Cav   7 K   Oct 26
   1304 Turrell Henry               22 H   May 23
   2945 Tubbs P                      7 K  July  6
     48 Tilt George            Cav   2 D   May 24
   3498 Thatcher E H            “    6 F  July 18
   6703 Tompkins N R                 1 B   Aug 24
   7009 Tift H                 Cav   5 M   Aug 27 64
   7544 Thompson W                   8 F  Sept  2
   7599 Tracy D                Cav   7 K  Sept  2
   7797 Thompson M C            C    5 I  Sept  4
   9103 Taylor H                    32 F  Sept 18
  11118 Taylor J M                  11 A   Oct 18
  11148 Twesler C, S’t               5 K   Oct 19
   3945 Udell W O                    2 D  July 25
    731 Vanderhoof Jas          C    6 G April 25
   1126 Vangieson L, S’t       Cav   5 D   May 15
   1467 Vogle Jacob                 27 D   May 29
   2270 Van Dyke Jno           Cav   6 D  June 20
   2994 Van Brant W H           C    9 E  July  7
   3278 Vanlin C, S’t                6 F  July 14
   6864 Vanshoten W H           C    6 K   Aug 26
   7595 Vansickle L, S’t       Cav   5 G  Sept  2
   8958 Vanmake F                   16 G  Sept 15
   9536 Vork C                       5 K  Sept 22
   9936 Vleight A                   22 D  Sept 28
  12166 Vanallen C                  27 K   Nov 26
  12690 Vincient J                   8 K   Feb 22 65
    340 Whittaker J                  7 B April  2 64
    733 Whipper G                    4 A April 25
    741 Wilson Byron           Cav   5 D April 26
    749 Wright Wm A                  7 K April 26
    957 Wilson J                    22 K   May  8
   2102 Wilson W                    11 I  June 17
   4961 Winegardner A S         C    1 K   Aug  7
  12723 White C                      5 F   Mar  3 65
  12796 Whitmore C             Cav   8 M   Mar 18
   6781 Wiley E T, Cor               1 E   Aug 25 64
    749 Wright Wm A                  7 K April  6
   1089 Woolsey R                   22 E   May 14
   1701 Walker J                    22 C  June  7
   1920 Wolf F                      13 E  June 14
   3301 Wentdarbly ——                5 G  July 14
   2899 Whitlock M                   2 B  July  5
   3180 Willet S, S’t                22 K  July 11
   3269 Wright W               Cav   5 K  July 13
   3437 Wolverton C                  6 B  July 17
   3992 Woodruff H             Cav   1 E  July 26
   4419 Warren H                     4 B  July 31
   4860 Walker Geo                  22 G   Aug  6
   5051 Williams M                   1 A   Aug  8
   5786 Williams T             Cav   2 L   Aug 15
  11323 Wolfinger J M               20 H   Oct 23
  12307 Windlass S             Cav   8 K   Dec 18
   5559 Warner C                     - F   Aug 13
  11096 Warner J               Cav   5 K   Oct 18
   9844 Wheeler E                   24 A  Sept 27
   5930 Wisner Jno, Cor        Cav   6 I   Aug 17
   8331 Wood A O, S’t          Cav   8 M  Sept 10
   8076 Wilder H S                  23 K  Sept  7
   6996 Wolverton J S          Cav   5 A   Aug 26
   7362 Way F                        7 C   Aug 31
   7812 Whalen H, S’t                6 I  Sept  4
   7882 Wells F                      7 F  Sept  5
   9022 Wing A                      17 G  Sept 17
   9525 Withworth W G           C    6 A  Sept  2
   2910 Yacht E, S’t                22 E  July  5
   2626 Zett J                      22 D  June 28
    TOTAL 638.


MINNESOTA.

   5964 Atkinson Geo                 9 F   Mar 17 64
   6567 Adcock Jas                   9 B   Mar 23
  11977 Abrian G                     1 B   Nov 12
   4224 Becker G                     9 E  July 29 64
   5715 Barnard H A                  9 A   Aug 15
   6630 Buyton M                     9 H   Aug 23
   7841 Brese D                      9 E  Sept  4
   7892 Brayton J M                  9 B  Sept  5
   8053 Buckley J F                  9 G  Sept  7
   8253 Burrows H                    9 K  Sept  9
   9474 Babcock L A                  9 D  Sept 21
   9800 Besgrove Isaac               9 E  Sept 26
  12778 Baker J G                    1 A   Mar 15 65
   2747 Conner P                    11 A  July  1 64
   3575 Clabaugh J                   9 D  July 19
   4111 Conklin S                    9 I  July 27
   6970 Conklin E                    9 C  July 27
  10724 Cassady J                    9 F   Oct  6
   7692 Dunham R H                   - K  Sept  3
  10971 Davis E J                    9 E   Oct 15
   8517 Fitch W F                    9 F  Sept 12
  12656 Fuchs H                      9 D   Feb 14 65
   9905 Freeschelz F                 9 F  Sept 27 64
   3287 Geer O                       9 F  July 14
  10401 Goodfellow E C               9 D   Oct  6
  10579 Goodwin G                    9 A   Oct  9
   4130 Gordon W C                  17 I  July 28
   6033 Higly M F                    9 G   Aug 18
   6064 Hill C J                     9 K   Aug 18
   6605 Handy J, Mus                 9 I   Aug 23
   9144 Heaway J E                   9 K  Sept 18
   4176 Holts A                      9 F  July 28
   7809 Johnson N                    9 H  July  4
   1211 Kerrick Sam                  4 K   May 19
   9127 Kloss L                      9 H  Sept 18
   5079 Lindley C                    9 B   Aug  8
   7795 Large M                      9 G  Sept  4
  12165 Lewis L                      9 E   Nov 26
  12510 Latimore W H                 9 D   Jan 22 65
   9312 Lenyer M                     9 G   Aug 30 64
   5460 Myers J                      3 I   Aug 13
   7288 Mander J W                   9 A   Aug 30
   8180 McDougal J                   9 A  Sept  8
   9195 Montenary J                  9 G  Sept 18
   2829 Nichols John                15 A  July  3
   7789 Ollman Wm                    9 B  Sept  4
   8384 Orcutt J, Cor                2 C  Sept 10
   2841 Pitcher E                    5 B  July  3
   4813 Packett C                    9 K   Aug  5
   5506 Pericle J                    9 H   Aug 13
   5909 Pence Geo                    9 H   Aug 16
   8353 Poinder T                    9 B  Sept 10
   8823 Pettijohn S W                9 H  Sept 14
   4277 Roberts J G                  9 E  July 29
   5588 Roovin J                     1 H   Aug 14
  10327 Robertson Jno                9 B   Oct  4
  10715 Reers Wm                     9 E   Oct 11
   5941 Short M                      9 K   Aug 17
   6216 Spence C                     9 G   Aug 20
   6276 Sontor C                     9 H   Aug 20
   7185 Scheffer H                   9 G   Aug 20
  12058 Shiver F, Cor                9 E   Nov 17
  12808 Sarf H                       5 E   Mar 22 65
   8408 Thompson W                   9 A  Sept 11 64
  10186 Tiltan N M                   9 B   Oct  1
  11603 Thomas W R                   9 E   Oct 28
  12106 Ulrin A, Cor                 9 E   Nov 20
  11505 Vanhouse B A, Cor            9 C   Oct 26
  11568 Vittam E W                   9 B   Oct 27
    986 Wood A                       2 B   May  9
   3867 Walrich P                    1 C  July 24 64
   4498 Wheeler A                    9 C   Aug  1
   4588 Woodbury J                   9 C   Aug  2
   5637 Wilson F C                   9 E   Aug 14
   8233 Waiter G                     9 H  Sept  9
   8416 Whipple O C                  9 F  Sept 11
   8459 Westover J                   9 E  Sept  9
   8777 Warren E F, Mus              9 A  Sept 14
   5006 Young D S                    9 I   Aug  8
    TOTAL 79.


MISSOURI.

    281 Burns Jno                   17 I April  1 64
   1251 Burk J H                     2 H   May  2
   1464 Buel J                       4 C   May 29
   2217 Bishop P                    15 I  June 20
   2306 Bloomker Wm                  2 F  June 22
   4269 Broyer J                     2 E  July 29
   5855 Birley Peter                29 I   Aug 16
   8664 Berger J                     2 I  Sept 13
   8772 Bitter H                    29 F  Sept 14
  11223 Bullard Jas                 19 D   Oct 20
  12795 Bates B                     44 F   Mar 18 65
   2861 Cling C                      2 I  July  4 64
   4328 Clements Jas           Cav   2 A  July 30
   6533 Cornell Jas            Cav   9 H   Aug 23
  12351 Coon F                      15 K   Dec 28
  12776 Chapman R                   24 B   Mar 14 65
   5260 Dicksen D                   18 -   Aug 10 64
   1641 Daley M                Cav  10 H  June  5
    343 Eddington G W               29 A April  2
   3963 Engler Jno                  15 B  July 25
   6987 Fogg B F, S’t          Cav   1 H   Aug 27
   8633 Folk L, Cor                 18 C  Sept 13
  11266 Fay J W, Cor                 2 K  Sept 21
  12805 Fry M, Cor             Cav  12 L   Mar 21 65
   6914 Frick S, Cor                 2 E   Aug 26 64
   2770 Guffy R                     18 E  July  2
   3725 Gallegher F                  2 G  July 21
    226 Houston W E                 18 E   Mar 29
   4505 Hunter W               Cav   1 H   Aug  1
   4568 Hartman V                   29 G   Aug  2
   4727 Huntsley A, S’t             22 H   Aug  4
   7064 Haginey F                    2 K   Aug 28
   1552 Head B J                    26 B  June  2
   2655 Holtgen G                   12 E  June 29
   8026 Hasse Jno              Cav  14 L  Sept  6
   9042 Hamilton W, Cor             31 A  Sept 17
  11941 Hanahan A                   29 D   Nov  9
   4410 Isenhour J                   9 I  July 31
   5709 Keyan M                      2 D   Aug 15
   7414 Keiler A                    29 H   Aug 31
   8178 Kline C S, S’t               2 F  Sept  8
  10546 Kaunst H                    18 G   Oct  9
  12821 Keller I                    40 H April  — 65
   7713 Kuhn Jacob                  15 E  Sept  3 64
   3249 Lowe Jno                    18 E  July 13
   4803 Lavilley Wm                 29 K   Aug  5
   7035 Lang C                 Cav  10 B   Aug 27
  12232 Litch J                      4 A   Dec  6
   5401 Lindsay J                   18 A   Aug 12
   7438 Miller W               Cav   4 E  Sept  1
   8913 Morgan E, Cor          Cav  12 F  Sept 16
  11035 Manning S H, S’t            30 A   Oct 16
  12459 Menzt W                     15 G   Jan 15 65
  12706 Martin J                    44 H   Feb 27
  12754 McGuire O              Cav   2 I   Mar 12
  12760 McDowell J                   2 F   Mar 12 65
   3456 Newkirk Chas                15 F  July 17 64
   3539 Neclout W                    2 E  July 18
   4169 Nelson Jno                  29 A  July 28
  12774 O’Dell E                    44 B   Mar 14 65
  12823 Purcell J R                 44 G April  5
    755 Phillips Pat                11 E April 27 64
     25 Payne Jos, Cor              29 A April 16
   4978 Perkins A H                 29 L   Aug  7
   6732 Plasmine A                  26 D   Aug 24
  10539 Plumer E D                  24 B   Oct  8
   1048 Reily P                     29 B   May 25
   3540 Riddle F                     8 D  July 18
   5110 Ritteman John               15 F   Aug  9
   6915 Remers J                     4 G   Aug 26
   2422 Robertson J C          Cav  10 F  June 25
   1424 Schenck Philip              15 B   May 26
   1478 Seebel A                    12 G   May 30
   1023 Search Henry                15 D  June  4
   2464 Stickle D                    4 D  June 24
   2480 Stofacke F                  15 D  June 25
     28 Stiner Gottlieb             29 A April 17
   5239 Stormn F                    58 E   Aug  9
   5667 Schmas G                    15 G   Aug 14
   6806 Segin C, S’t                 2 H   Aug 26
   6030 Shuman Jos                   1 B   Aug 26
   7535 Sherman H                   15 G  Sept  1
   9821 Schaat D B                  18 E  Sept 26
    536 Trask Geo K                 29 A April 14
    770 Terrill Christian           27 E April 27
   1509 Terrell J                   12 A   May 31
   5672 Tresler H W                  4 I   Aug 14
  12730 Turman D                    44 B   Mar  4 65
   2803 Vance H J                   26 B  July  3 64
    373 Walham H, S’t                4 C April  5
    678 Watson J J                  18 A April 22
   3106 Wigan M                      2 F  July 10
   7494 Williams J M                31 H  Sept  1
  10889 Weidam J, Cor                2 B   Oct 14
  12550 Ware J B                    40 K   Jan 29 65
  12739 West J                      40 K   Mar  6
    TOTAL 97.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

     26 Ames John C, S’t             2 F   Mar 18 64
     29 Allen E S                    2 H   Mar  9
   4656 Allen S                      9 C   Aug  3
   4746 Abbott C                     7 K   Aug  5
   7130 Arches J L                   9 A   Aug 28
   9518 Atmore G W                   3 C  Sept 22
   9832 Anderson J N                 7 E  Sept 24
  11765 Avery J                Cav   1 H   Nov  3
   5721 Austendalph J                3 D   Aug 15
    833 Bushbey N                    7 C   May  1
   3346 Bailey A D                   7 C  July 15
   3380 Bush A                       4 H  July 16
   4447 Bachelor J R                 1 -   Aug  1
   4965 Baker Wm                     4 H   Aug  7
   4988 Babb Jas                     7 D   Aug  7
   6871 Brown W F                    2 B   Aug 26
   6765 Breakman A                  12 I   Aug 25
   7857 Baker D W                    3 G  Sept  5
   8463 Bell Geo                     5 C  Sept 11
  10294 Bond J                      12 F   Oct  4
   2228 Clark G M, Cor               7 C   May 20
   3326 Combs John                   7 B  July 14
   4230 Coon Charles                 7 G  July 29
   5137 Colbry John N               13 D   Aug  9 64
   7072 Cooney Thomas                9 C   Aug 28
   8551 Connelly M                   4 C  Sept 12
   2796 Chadwick C E                 7 H  July  2
  11192 Carr P                       1 H   Oct 20
   1370 Downs E                      7 I   May 25
   2986 Doer S                       7 D  June 17
   3668 Dodge C F, S’t               7 K  July 20
   5577 Drake Chas C           Cav   1 B   Aug 14
   3566 Eschoymer H            Cav   1 B  July 19
   5337 Estey E E                    4 C   Aug 10
   8426 Edwards John                 9 H  Sept 11
  12841 Elliott A                    7 I April 21 65
   1396 Fuller George                7 B   May 26 64
   5240 Faucett J                    7 C   Aug 10
   6678 Flanders O                   9 F   Aug 24
   6894 Ford W                       7 K   Aug 26
   9460 Faggerty Jackson        C    1 A  Sept 21
  12440 Felch G P                    7 H   Jan 12 65
   2838 Guingoelett H                2 E  July  3 64
   4413 Gill N                       7 A  July 31
   4687 Gooley J, Cor                7 G   Aug  4
  11905 Goodwin A                    1 I   Nov  7
   9671 Gardiner A                   4 C  Sept 24
   6516 Gray G H                     4 E   Aug 22
   6143 Hunter C                     4 K   Aug 19
   6875 Hurd Wm                      6 1   Aug 26
   7869 Hartford H                   4 A  Sept  5
   8537 Hally H                      7 C  Sept 12
  10269 Huse W, Cor                 11 H   Oct  3
  11156 Hamlin G W             Cav   1 I   Oct 19
  11439 Holmes J, Cor                7 -   Oct 24
  11468 Holmes J                     7 -   Oct 26
   7733 Janes J B                    9 K  Sept  3
   9198 Johnson O O                  5 F  Sept 18
  11216 Juntplute F                 12 E   Oct 20
  11758 Johnson P                    9 E   Nov  3
   4314 Keyes C                Cav   1 K  July 30
   5114 Kemp C H                     7 A   Aug  9
   5151 Kingsbury H R                9 R   Aug  9
   5444 Karson H B, Cor              2 C   Aug 12
   7394 Kreaser M                    4 I   Aug 31
  11877 Klinsmith J, Cor            10 I   Nov  6
  11994 Kingsbury J H, S’t     Cav   1 A   Nov 13
   6144 Lawrence A              “    1 C   Aug 19
   6787 Lenert D                     9 K   Aug 25
   8048 Libby A G                    4 H  Sept  6
  11415 Leport J               Cav   3 I   Oct 24
  11484 Lucht P                      5 C   Oct 26
   2687 Mumford A                   12 A  June 30
   3652 Mantove J                    4 H  June 20
   4284 Miller F                    11 G  July 30
   4629 Miller R                    11 H   Aug  3
   7203 Milliot P                    5 I   Aug 29
   7423 Morrison O P                 9 C   Aug 31
   7918 Morten J                     4 C  Sept  6
   8573 McCann M                     9 G  Sept 12
   9921 Matheson F                   7 B  Sept 28
  11207 McCann O                    13 E   Oct 20
  12234 Montyan P                   35 F   Dec  6
   1658 O’Brien Chas                 7 I  June  6
  11698 Osmore J               Cav   1 C   Oct 31
   6185 Patch John                   3 T   Aug 19
    819 Poore Samuel, Cor            2 H April 30
   3260 Puny J                       3 G  July 13
   4764 Place I K                    7 F   Aug  5
   7011 Patterson N                  9 I   Aug 27 64
  11121 Parsons Samuel               5 H   Oct 18
  11828 Perven H A                   7 A   Nov  5
  11837 Phelps M F                   9 D   Nov  5
   5383 Paschal E                    7 E   Aug 12
   1572 Reed F K                     2 H  June  3
   2771 Ramsay Wm                    7 G  July  2
   3406 Richards W R                 7 C  July 16
  11000 Ringer J K, S’t Mj          11 -   Oct 22
   1336 Smith John                   7 K   May 24
   2330 Sanburn W                    7 H  June 22
   2505 Sanlay E                     9 E  June 26
   2708 Simms S                      9 C  June 30
   2925 Searle I R                   7 E  July  5
   3472 Smith L F                   13 C  July 17
   4779 Steward George              10 A   Aug  5
   5140 Smith J                      7 B   Aug  9
   5198 Schean W                     7 A   Aug  9
   5405 Shorey Ed                    1 C   Aug 12
   5438 Salsbur I                    4 K   Aug 12
   5621 Stanley John                 9 A   Aug 14
   6547 Smith I                     11 E   Aug 23
   7040 Swain C                      7 D   Aug 27
   8629 Smith C                      3 F  Sept 13
   8652 Stark S                     15 A  Sept 13
   8980 Smith John                   3 T  Sept 17
   9412 Smith L                     12 B  Sept 21
  10503 Shantz I                    11 G   Oct  8
  11887 Spaulding T C                4 K   Nov  7
   3396 Taylor A B                   5 H  July 16
   3431 Tobine T                     6 A  July 17
   4072 Tilton D B                   7 G  July 26
   8098 Thompson A                   9 K  Sept  8
  10734 Tilton L G                  11 B   Oct 11
  10493 Upkins A               Cav   1 B   Oct  7
   5491 Valley John                 10 K   Aug 12
    794 Woodward L A                 7 K April 29
   1991 Williams I                   7 I  June 15
   2345 Woodbury A                   7 H  June 23
   2545 Whipple J, Cor               7 H  June 23
   4156 Webster J                    6 I  July 28
   2710 Welson W                     4 F  July  1
   4104 Whalen M                     9 H  July 27
   4750 Weston W W                   8 A   Aug  5
   4749 Welch Jas                    7 I   Aug  5
   5702 Wagner John                  7 H   Aug 15
   7559 Welsh I                      7 C  Sept  2
   7834 Wolf John D                  3 F  Sept  4
   8083 Wultramsen F                 9 I  Sept  7
  11278 Williams P                   3 H   Oct 22
  11472 Wingerd D                    3 G   Oct 26
  11768 Wilson I                    11 I   Nov  3
  11878 Warren E               Cav   1 H   Nov  6
  12734 Whitman G E, S’t        “    1 B   Mch  6 65
   8736 York Charles            “    1 B  Sept 14 64
    TOTAL 144.


NEW JERSEY.

   3347 Aaron Thos                   2 B  July 15 64
   3354 Aney G                       1 K  July 15
   4098 Austin D B                   2 I  July 27
   7138 Anderson T                   2 E   Aug 28
   8513 Albright ——, Cor       Cav   3 I  Sept 12
  11389 Alexander W L           “    3 C   Oct 24
  12646 Amps C                      33 I   Feb 13 65
    909 Broderick I S                2 A   May  5 64
   1548 Beach I H                   11 E  June  1 64
   2181 Brannin Pat                 11 B  June 19
   2260 Bells I H                    2 H  June 21
   2577 Buckley John                 1 G  June 27
   2980 Bloon Adam                   2 I  July  4
   3099 Buffman A C, Cor       Art   1 B  July 10
   5761 Baily L                      7 A   Aug  9
   5272 Brann Geo              Cav   1 B   Aug 10
   5357 Burns P                 “    3 C   Aug 11
   5379 Baker Wm                “    1 K   Aug 12
   5483 Blanchard G                  7 K   Aug 13
   5934 Bennet C                    14 B   Aug 17
  11682 Brant Chas                   1 E   Oct 31
  12288 Buver A                      6 I   Dec  7
  12640 Brewer W H                  10 D   Feb 12 65
    715 Corley Daniel               11 A April 24 64
   1437 Creamer E                   35 A   May 28
   6929 Creamer E                   10 B   Aug 26
   3209 Chamberlain K          Cav   1 D  July 12
   5730 Clark C H                    2 C   Aug 15
   8240 Coonan J                     2 C  Sept  9
  10552 Collar H                     2 D  Sept  9
  11990 Clayton L                   10 B   Nov 13
   3476 Curtis W O, S’t        Cav   1 L  July 17
   8041 Coykendall D                15 K  Sept  6
    335 Disbrow J P                 14 K April  2
   2473 Davenport J                  7 I  June 25
   3444 Davis H                     12 F  July 17
   4926 Dayton C                     2 C   Aug  6
   5148 Dorland A H                 10 I   Aug  9
   6306 Dewinger J                   2 G   Aug 20
   7076 Dunham L                    35 H   Aug 28
   7304 Dilan Edward                 9 G   Aug 30
   7469 Dermer J L                   9 G  Sept  1
   7734 Doremus C              Cav   2 A  Sept  3
   7804 Duncan H P                   2 G  Sept  4
   8440 Doyle H                     16 C  Sept 11
  10533 Dunn G                       1 F  Sept 18
   1426 Ebner Chas             Cav   1 K   May 28
   1715 Egbert Jas                  15 B  June  8
   4303 Esligh Jacob                10 D  July 13
   1522 Farrell J H                  5 G   May 31
   3938 Foliand M, Cor         Cav   1 K  July 25
   4693 Fitch F, S’t                35 F   Aug  4
   5327 Fry Jno                      9 G   Aug  4
   6737 Fisher Wm                    9 C   Aug 24
   7285 Farran J                     3 -   Aug 30
   9972 Fairbrother H               35 D  Sept 28
  11584 Ford A                       7 K   Oct 28
   7338 Fisher N O                   9 I   Aug 30
   5900 Gale B, Cor                  9 D   Aug 16
   7039 Galloway F C                12 K   Aug 27
  11165 Glenn C H                    4 I   Oct 19
  11120 Guier G                      7 D   Oct 20
   1508 Hallman H                    6 C   May 31
   3072 Hemis Daniel           Cav   1 D  July  9
   3819 Hick James                   9 G  July 23
   4151 Hegamann J                  14 K  July 28
   4189 Hammle A               Cav   1 -  July 28
   4744 Huber C                      9 G   Aug  5
   4862 Herbert J S            Cav   2 I   Aug  6
   4911 Halman M                “    1 A   Aug  6
    821 Hull Alex                    7 C  Sept  4
   7870 Howell J                     1 K  Sept  5
   7900 Hilgard P F, Cor            10 A  Sept  5
  10761 Hatter W                     3 I   Oct 12
  12302 Humes E M                    2 M   Dec 17
  12416 Hook J M               Cav   2 D   Jan  8 65
   5252 Jennings G H            “    2 A   Aug 10 64
   9519 Jone A                  “    1 A  Sept 22
  11117 Jay H, Cor                   5 K   Oct 18
  11399 Jomson G W                   6 G   Oct 24
  12344 Johnson A F                  9 D   Dec 26
   3762 Kronk Peter            Cav   2 H  July 22
   5085 Kuhn R                       9 A   Aug  8
   8649 Kitchell S                   7 K  Sept 13
  12023 King C                      15 G   Nov 15
   1985 Lyons D                Cav   1 K  June 15
    795 Layton Stephen              11 A April 29
   1769 Lindsley Samuel             10 H  June  9
   3622 Lewis S                Cav   3 -  July 20
   4095 Leadbeater J H               6 B  July 27
   5944 Leighton Wm                  5 H   Aug 17
   6157 Luney Ed                     8 G   Aug 19
  12102 Larime C                    15 C   Nov 20
   2019 Menner Jacob                11 H  June 15
   2852 Miller J               Cav   1 K  July  4
   3323 McIntire R                   8 I  July 14
   3548 Marks Chas             Cav   2 G  July 18
   4594 Mulrainy I                   4 B   Aug  3
   4645 Miller S S             Cav   2 G   Aug  3
   5250 Morell A                     5 K   Aug 10
   5832 Mahler Jno                  35 I   Aug 16
   6986 Munn Chas                    4 K   Aug 27
   8019 McElroy E                   10 I  Sept  6
   8332 Mount C H                    9 D  Sept 10
   8592 Miller J                     7 K  Sept 13
  10959 Mullan A                    39 B   Oct 14
  12252 Mills F                      2 I   Oct 21
  11564 Millington J           Cav   1 H   Oct 27
   6780 Noll M                       9 A   Aug 25
   4983 Nichols J              S S   1 C   Aug  7
   7131 Osborne E                   14 E   Aug 28
  10463 Osborn J M                   9 H   Oct  7
   1071 Pratt J F                    1 M   May 13
   1072 Purdee Chas                 11 C   May 13
   5206 Peterson Henry         Cav   3 H   Aug 10
   6298 Peer T                       9 K   Aug 20
   6962 Pelger M                    10 G   Aug 27
   7451 Peterson G                  12 I  Sept  1
   8017 Post C J                     4 I  Sept  6
   9990 Parker W                     2 I  Sept 29
  12221 Prink J                      2 -   Dec  4
   2145 Rooks H                      5 H  June 18
   2821 Riley M                Cav   1 L  July  3
   4066 Robinson Jacob          “    1 B  July 27
   4858 Radford Wm                  18 B   Aug  6
   8282 Reed A                       9 D  Sept  9
  10461 Ray J                       10 A   Oct  7
  10708 Regan D O                    8 C   Oct 11
  11292 Reevis F                     2 I   Oct 21
   2548 Starr N                      5 H  June 27
   5087 Simonds J                    9 K   Aug  8
   5807 Shanahan W                   9 C   Aug 16
   7364 Stout L, S’t                 2 C   Aug 21
   7565 Street John J                9 D  Sept  2
   7577 Stiffin H                    3 M  Sept  2
   7729 Skell C W              Cav   3 M  Sept  3
   8687 Swetser P                    9 G  Sept 13
   8751 Stevenson W            Cav   2 M  Sept 14
   9328 Shay H H                     7 I  Sept 19
  10846 Smith A                      5 G   Oct 13
  10615 Sutton T                    12 K   Oct 28
  11653 Stimmell I                   5 A   Oct 30
  11793 Sullivan I                   8 C   Nov  8 64
  11882 Steele George                2 B   Nov  6
  10882 Sweet B F                   10 K   Oct 13
   1853 Tindel E, S’t                1 B  June 11
   5112 Taylor Peter                 9 -   Aug  9
   6131 Townsend J                  35 I   Aug 19
   7937 Turner B                     4 G  Sept  5
   9398 Townsend F                  10 C  Sept 21
  11364 Thompson S                   4 I   Oct 21
  12451 Thatcher J                   8 H   Jan 14 65
  12705 Toy J                        7 G   Feb 27
  10212 Thomas Henry                10 B   Oct  2 64
   6448 Traittman Jas                9 D   Aug 22
   3634 Utter Stephen          Art   1 B  June 29
  12100 Vallett W               “    5 A   Nov 19
   1955 Weed Wm, Cor                15 I  June 14
   2246 Wood W J                    12 E  June 20
   4643 Widder W                     5 G   Aug  3
   4998 Wainwright                   9 C   Aug  7
   5031 Wolverton                    1 I   Aug  8
   5099 Warner A                     4 A   Aug  9
   5333 Willey J               Cav   2 M   Aug 10
   6168 Winard Wm                    2 I   Aug 19
   7560 Willis A                    35 I  Sept  2
   8142 Wright S M                   7 K  Sept  8
   8307 Ward J                 Cav   1 H  Sept 10
  12157 Williams W                   1 D   Nov 20
  12658 Wells G                     10 C   Feb 15 65
    TOTAL 170.


NEW YORK.

   2038 Abbey O, Cor               174 -  June 15 64
   2141 Abbey W H                   85 E  June 18
   4719 Abel C                 Art  15 C   Aug  4
   4612 Aber J                     104 I   Aug  3
   5626 Ackerman Saml               97 K   Aug 14
     64 Ackheart David              20 A   Mar 19
   8497 Adams H                     98 G  Sept 11
   4581 Adams J A                   10 F   Aug  2
   6467 Adams O                     61 C   Aug 22
   8559 Adams S, S’t               100 -  Sept 12
   3226 Adams T R                   85 H  July 12
   1700 Ades Ed                Cav   8 C  June  7
   5047 Adeler A                     8 D   Aug  8
   6575 Adney F                     85 K   Aug 23
   4382 Ahearn Daniel              170 -  July 31
   3349 Aiken J W                   85 H  July 15
   8001 Akerman M              Art   7 L  Sept  6
   7062 Albarson J                  42 C   Aug 28
   6698 Albert Wm              Bat  24 -   Aug 24
   7007 Alderman F             Cav  15 F   Aug 27
   1755 Alexander J                125 C  June  9
  11212 Alford B C                 152 F   Oct 20
   3293 Allen A W              Art  14 -  July 14
  12452 Allen J I                   82 A   Jan 14 65
   5568 Allen W                Cav   1 H   Aug 13 64
   5844 Allenburger J               39 B   Aug 16
   7478 Allenberens E               39 D  Sept  1
  11497 Allinger L                  48 I   Oct 26
   7587 Allman Chas            Art   7 C  Sept  2
   6941 Almy F                     111 K   Aug 26
   5938 Alphord J                   75 G   Aug 17
   7739 Alsaver S                   47 H  Sept  3
    800 Ambler Fred                 47 H   Apr 29
   2344 Ambrose Jacob           C    2 C  June 23
  10642 Ames Henry             Art   2 -   Oct 10
   4654 Ames J R, S’t          Art  14 I   Aug  3
   7743 Amgere G                    47 E  Sept  3 64
   1954 Amigh A                    162 K  June 14
   3739 Anderson A                 100 I  July 21
   4890 Anderson A                  99 F   Aug  6
    537 Anderson H             Cav  20 M   Apr 14
   8819 Anderson J                  39 E  Sept 15
   4110 Anderson L                  14 D  July 27
   1389 Andrews G                  111 I   May 26
   7533 Andrews W                   85 K  Sept  1
   8717 Ansom Robt             Cav   1 K  Sept 14
   6548 Answell J               “   15 A   Aug 23
   8220 Antisdale Geo           “    5 -  Sept  4
   6976 Appleby S W                 85 K   Aug 27
   9741 Argt C                       6 -  Sept 25
  11172 Armond W                     7 F   Oct 19
   9475 Armstrong H                140 G  Sept 21
  10818 Armstrong J                164 C   Oct 12
  11571 Armstrong W            Bat  24 -   Oct 27
   7470 Arnold R B             Art   7 L  Sept  1
   6551 Arnott C                    47 C   Aug 26
   1580 Asley C G                  146 G  June  3
  12202 Auster F                    39 B   Dec  1
  12622 Ashley S, Citizen            - -   Feb  9 65
   5544 Ashton ——, Cor              10 I   Aug 13 64
   7207 Atwood G S             Bat  24 -   Aug 29
    950 Aubray K, S’t               14 A   May  8
  11748 Augh J                      66 D   Nov  2
   5027 Augustine F                 52 A   Aug  8
   1736 Austin A                   147 H  June  8
   3094 Austin J               Art   7 M  July 10
   8218 Austin G                   147 H  Sept  3
  12830 Ayers G S                  147 G   Mar 29 65
  12347 Babcock J M                140 I   Dec 27 64
   1712 Babcock H                  111 G   May  7
   3066 Babcock J                   72 E  July  9
   5335 Babcock J                   55 E   Aug 11
   4638 Babcock J S                140 D   Aug  3
   4893 Babcock R                    9 L   Aug  9
  11831 Babcock W H            Cav  13 L   Nov  5
   5692 Babst M                      9 D   Aug 15
    754 Bacon E P                  154 B   Apr 27
   9101 Bacon J                    154 E  Sept 18
   2870 Bacchus A                  169 A  July  4
  11272 Bacchus E R            Art  15 F   Oct 22
   3447 Bachelder B F          Bat  24 -  July 17
   3115 Backley C               “   24 -  July 10
   3771 Badger P                    47 E  July 22
   7890 Bailey A                     5 K  Sept  5
  10163 Bailey C                    76 K   Oct  1
   5697 Bailey G W, Cor            154 G   Aug 15
   7493 Bailey Jno             Cav  12 A  Sept  1
   8215 Baker J                Bat  24 -  Sept  8
  10636 Baker A                      9 B   Oct 10
   4468 Baker Chas                  52 G   Aug  1
   3550 Baker E                     85 E  July 18
  12376 Baker Geo                   40 H   Jan  1 65
   8759 Baker H                    146 F  Sept 14 64
   8052 Baker Ira                   85 H  Sept  7
  11848 Baker J                     24 F   Nov  5
  11660 Baker J, Cor           Cav  16 K   Oct 31
     61 Baker Wm                     7 D   Mar 18
   7591 Baldwin C              Cav  24 M  Sept  2
   6853 Baldwin G                  154 C   Aug 25
   4457 Ballard Robt B              85 C   Aug  1
   4364 Barnard Wm                  85 K  July 31
   5347 Bancroff A H                85 -   Aug 11
   8592 Barrett G M                184 E  Sept  8
  11605 Banigan A                   82 A   Oct 28 64
   5536 Banker J M                 118 K   Aug 13
   9819 Banker J T                 152 G  Sept 26
   8443 Bannan H                    39 H  Sept 11
  11056 Bannyer F                  126 K   Oct 17
  12315 Barber H, Cor               96 D   Dec 20
   1689 Barge H, S’t               120 A  June  6
   3748 Barnes J               Cav  12 F  July 22
   6771 Barnes J S              “   10 K   Aug 25
  11343 Barnes M, Cor              115 F   Oct 23
   6963 Barnes A C                  85 D   Aug 27
   8821 Barnes R W             Bat  24 -  Sept 15
  10418 Barnes Thos                 76 B   Oct  6
   1835 Barrett J                  132 C  June 11
   8361 Barnum H                    39 H  Sept 10
   7877 Barklett H             Bat  24 -  Sept  5
   8192 Barrett G M                184 A  Sept  8
  10153 Barratt G                   22 A   Oct  1
    588 Barrett D                   13 H   Apr 16
   9979 Barron C L             Bat  12 -  Sept 28
   3580 Barrows M                   14 G  July 19
  11612 Bartill R                  164 F   Oct 28
   4769 Bartlett L                 118 I   Aug  5
   8409 Barton D                    85 I  Sept 11
   6552 Bass Chas              Art   7 B   Aug 23
   8217 Bass Geo, Teamster          63 -  Sept  8
   8097 Bassford J             Cav  12 G  Sept  7
   5555 Bates G                      5 A   Aug 13
    530 Bates J                     97 A   Apr 13
   3845 Bates Jno, Cor              14 I  July 24
   1069 Bates Lester                97 A   May 13
  10556 Baters W                   139 G   Oct  9
  10999 Baty A                     132 K   Oct 16
     61 Bayne Daniel                57 D  July  4
   9380 Baywood J, S’t         Cav   1 I  Sept 20
   6021 Beam B                  “    2 M   Aug 17
   4302 Beck John                   97 H  July 30
   6034 Beckham F B            Cav  10 A   Aug 18
   9216 Beckshire J, Cor        “   12 F  Sept 19
   8472 Beckwith C             Art  14 D  Sept 11
   5012 Bee George                 119 F   Aug  8
   8992 Beebe J E                   11 -  Sept 17
   3843 Beekman J                   43 A  July 23
  11933 Beers W                     82 B   Nov  8
   8010 Belden Wm                   82 E  Sept  6
   3267 Bell D S               Mil  20 D  July 13
   9136 Bell J                       6 B  Sept 18
  11124 Bell J C                   120 D   Oct 18
   8942 Bell Wm, Cor                39 K  Sept 16
  11694 Bellvea C                  179 F   Oct 31
   3089 Bennett J H                 85 E  July  9
   3138 Bennett ——                 146 B  July 10
   5945 Bentley C              Cav  22 L   Aug 17
   6670 Bentner Josh               100 I   Aug 24
   6979 Benway C               Art   6 K   Aug 27
  10955 Berges E                   146 B   Oct 14
   6598 Benall M L                 125 A   Aug 23
   5749 Beat Isaac                  42 G   Aug 15
   6039 Bertin F                    69 G   Aug 18
   6137 Besrha John            Art  15 B   Aug 19
   8234 Buell J, S’t                85 B  Sept  9
   5230 Beyers H                    24 K   Aug 10
    351 Bidon S                     52 A   Apr  2
  10635 Bidwell J              Cav   5 G   Oct 10
   3232 Bigelow L                   85 D  July 12
  10555 Billings J             Cav   2 M   Oct  8
    601 Billings W W                52 G   Apr 17
  10945 Bings G                Art   5 B   Oct 14 64
  10005 Bingham C E            Cav   5 D  Sept 29
  12831 Bird M                 Art   7 K   Apr 14 65
   4780 Bird P, Cor             “    7 K   Aug  5 64
   6590 Bishop C                “    7 M   Aug 23
   5786 Bissell J S                 85 D   Aug 15
  11018 Black J                     42 G   Oct 16
   2574 Black L                      9 A  June 27
  11971 Black H C                   42 F   Nov 12
   1885 Blackman J                  85 -  June 13
   4076 Blackwood W                115 G  July 27
   7989 Blair D                     15 C  Sept  5
  12469 Blair Jas, Cor         Cav   8 K   Jan 16 65
    498 Blaize H               Art   3 H   Apr 12 64
   3236 Blake W D              Bat  24 -  July 22
   2439 Blake Geo                  100 I  June 25
   6129 Blanchard E            Cav  12 F   Aug 19
   8340 Blanchard L                100 K  Sept 10
  10083 Blancolt Wm                 95 B  Sept 30
   1861 Blank J M                   95 A  June 12
   4933 Bliss Jas H            Cav  22 I   Aug  7
   8959 Block J P                  100 F  Sept 16
   7206 Blood L                      7 C   Aug 29
   2777 Blyme S                     85 G  July  2
  12521 Boaman J               Cav   1 D   Jan 25 65
   6371 Boares A                   178 D   Aug 21 64
   5285 Bode A                      85 B   Aug 11
   2989 Bodishay J                   7 F  July  7
    474 Boermaster J                14 A   Apr  9
   3073 Bohl H                 Cav  10 E  July  9
   6018 Bolan E, S’t                35 F   Aug 17
  11718 Bolby O                Art  14 D   Nov  1
   8267 Boles J                Cav  22 D  Sept  9
   3606 Bomsteel S A                20 G  July 19
   5269 Borst J                Cav   5 B   Aug 10
   4401 Bodler D                     7 D  July 31
     51 Boughton H                  77 A   Mar 16
   7627 Boulton T                   43 G  Sept  2
  10066 Bowden P               Cav  16 M   Oct 17
   6744 Bowen J H                   65 D   Aug 24
   4601 Bowin J                Cav   7 K   Aug  3
  11944 Bowman H                    84 K   Nov 10
  12521 Bowman I               Cav   1 D   Jan 25 65
   3635 Bowman S                   147 H  July 20 64
   1275 Box G                      111 D   May 22
   9728 Boyce A                Cav   3 I  Sept 25
   2673 Boyce R                 “    6 M  June 30
     10 Boyle Pat                   63 A   Mar  5
   8912 Boyle Pat                   48 F  Sept 16
  11974 Boyle I                     16 D   Nov 12
   4365 Bradford D B           Art   7 B  July 31
   5232 Bradley Jno                 69 K   Aug 10
   6685 Bradshaw R, Cor            120 E   Aug 24
  12219 Brady J                    140 E   Dec  4
   3979 Bragg J C              Cav   2 E  July 26
  12263 Brain Wm               Art   5 B   Dec 12
   7704 Brandon O               “   15 A  Sept  3
   1800 Breny Jas                  178 K  June 10
   5134 Brewer Fred                 39 C   Aug  9
  11685 Brewer Henry, S’t      Cav   2 G   Oct 31
  10221 Brewer J S                   6 B   Oct  2
   1365 Brewer S                    15 K   May 25
    519 Brewer Thos                111 F   Apr 13
   9690 Bryant L A                 146 B  Sept 24
   8116 Bright ——                  104 C  Sept  8
  11627 Brightman E                  7 D   Oct 28
   8415 Brill C                    140 F  Sept 11
   6953 Brink C                    109 K   Aug 26 64
   9787 Britansky J                 52 E  Sept 26
   2997 Brobst J                    52 B  July  7
   9148 Brock W                     76 F  Sept 18
   6882 Broder H                    76 F   Aug 26
  12002 Brogan J M                  85 B   Nov 14
   1324 Brooks W, Cor          Cav  10 E   May 24
   1221 Brott A                 “    1 K   May 19
   9838 Broscang C                 150 C  Sept 27
   7517 Brought Chas           Art  14 I  Sept  1
     51 Broughten H                 77 H   Mar 16
  10668 Brown A                    140 K   Oct 11
   5538 Brown B M                   85 I   Aug 13
   4112 Brown C                    103 C  July 27
   9556 Brown C                     66 K  Sept 23
  11953 Brown C                     39 H   Nov 10
  11928 Brown C                Cav   1 M   Nov  8
   6623 Brown Chas                  97 F   Aug 23
   7501 Brown D                    118 B  Sept  1
   3659 Brown E G              Art   7 L  July 20
   9674 Brown G H                   85 H  Sept 24
   7985 Brown G H                   63 C  Sept  6
   2465 Brown H                     72 C  June 25
   1879 Brown H                Cav  12 -  June 12
   7266 Brown H, Cor                39 F   Aug 30
   1887 Brown J                    125 -  June 13
   7658 Brown J                     16 -  Sept  3
   6655 Brown James            Cav   4 E   Aug 24
   6691 Brown James                170 K   Aug 24
   7526 Brown John                  66 -  Sept  1
   7615 Brown Wm                     5 D  Sept  2
    552 Brown Warren               120 K   Apr 14
    428 Brown Wm                    42 A   Apr  8
   7390 Broxmire Thos               15 E   Aug 31
   1559 Brumaghin T                125 E  June  2
   4475 Bryant D                   179 B   Aug  1
   7248 Bryant H                    82 F   Aug 30
   7668 Bryan Wm               Cav   1 I  Sept  3
   3814 Buck                        24 H  July 23
   9975 Buckbier J             Art   7 F  Sept 28
  10585 Buckley Wm                 122 D   Oct 10
   5714 Buel G W                   115 E   Aug 15
    331 Buel S                      42 B   Apr  2
  12417 Buffman L, S’t             100 K   Jan  8 65
   7567 Buckley E A                 97 E  Sept  2 64
  12509 Burfield C, Citizen          - -   Jan 22 65
   5953 Bullier Wm Cav              23 B   Aug 17 64
   9642 Bullock E, Cor              85 E  Sept 24
   4137 Bundy Josh             Art   7 B  July 28
    540 Bunn W H                   132 F   Apr 14
   9870 Bunnell W                   59 C  Sept 27
   6452 Burbanks J                  85 D   Aug 22
  10924 Burdick A                   85 C   Oct 14
    978 Burdick C                   47 F   May  9
   2134 Burdick Sam’l              125 A  June 18
   7838 Burdock L              Cav  22 L  Sept  4
  10016 Burleigh L             Art   6 F  Sept 29
  12389 Burley C                     3 B   Jan  4 65
    619 Burns E J, S’t         Cav  13 D   Apr 19 64
    477 Burns Jno                   40 I   Apr  9
    924 Burns Jno                   99 H   May  6
  11881 Burns J                    118 F   Nov  6
   8745 Burns W                Cav   3 C  Sept 14
   5991 Burns Daniel           Art   5 D   Aug 17
   7247 Burr H                      59 C   Aug 30
   6171 Bursha Thos            Art   2 M   Aug 19
   3165 Burshen F                   54 C  July 11
   2875 Burt J                 Cav   2 A  July  4 64
   7214 Burton G E                  85 K   Aug 29
    217 Burton Henry               140 -   Mar 29
   5847 Buserman E                  97 E   Aug 16
   6457 Bush E                      20 D   Aug 22
   1415 Bushnell A                  65 D   May 27
    487 Buthan J R                 132 G   Apr 11
  11366 Bushley Wm, Cor        Art   5 A   Oct 23
   1360 Buskirk A                   47 A   May 25
   2047 Buskirt O                   13 -  June 15
    721 Butler Thos                132 G   Apr 25
   4183 Butler W                    43 D  July 28
  12651 Butoff R, S’t              124 C   Feb 13 65
  10848 Butler Jas             Cav   2 D   Oct 13 64
   9235 Butter P                   126 D  Sept 19
   5805 Button Jas             Art  24 B   Aug 16
   3446 Butts A                    111 C  July 17
   9790 Byron J, Cor                69 A  Sept 26
   1224 Burke W H                  120 I   May 19
   5196 Burk Jno                    69 K   Aug 10
   1073 Brower Jno A           Art   5 D   Oct 17
  12190 Cademus C                   48 A  June 19
  10765 Cady Geo                    66 G   Oct 12
   2377 Cady J                      77 E  June 23
  10721 Cady J J                    14 H   Oct 11
   3062 Cane M                     132 E  July  9
   2136 Cale J                      85 G  June 18
   9040 Caldham L C            Cav   8 L  Sept 17
  11807 Caldwell A                  42 A   Nov  4
   1530 Caling Ed                    7 H   Oct 26
   9706 Calkins S V                120 D  Sept 25
   8411 Callbrook J                147 B  Sept 11
   2848 Cameron Jno            Cav   1 H  July  4
   1770 Camp H                  “    2 F  June  9
   1238 Campbell D              “    8 H   May 20
   7236 Campbell J                  99 I   Aug 29
    946 Campbell L R               104 B   May  7
   8793 Campbell M                 169 K  Sept 15
  11294 Campbell W                   2 C   Oct 22
   7378 Campbell Wm                 76 B   Aug 31
  12178 Card A                     152 C   Nov 27
   5034 Card G                     109 F   Aug  8
   8136 Carboines W, Cor            39 C  Sept  8
   6433 Cardon E                   115 A   Aug 22
   7555 Carey D                     57 A  Sept  2
  11512 Carey F                     65 E   Oct 26
    372 Carl Josh                   14 A   Apr  5
   5545 Carl L                     120 G   Aug 13
  12339 Carle ——               Cav   1 D   Dec 26
  12268 Carmac F                     2 D   Dec 12
   7655 Carmer A                    85 B  Sept  3
  11640 Carney M               Cav   9 L   Oct 30
   8470 Carnehan Chas B             24 -  Sept 11
   5258 Carney D J                 132 G   Aug 10
   9879 Carney Francis A             2 C  Sept 27
   3102 Carnes P Cav                13 B  July 10
  10806 Carpenter Frank A            7 C   Oct 12
   8854 Carpenter G                  7 D  Sept 15
   4632 Carpenter H A          Art   2 A   Aug  3
   3916 Carpenter L             “    2 B  July 25
   3977 Carpenter M B               85 B  July 26
   6743 Carr Andrew                 22 -   Aug 24
   3859 Carr D                      25 B  July 24
    581 Carr F, Cor            Art   3 K   Apr 16
   6470 Carr Geo A              “    3 K   Aug 22
   5673 Carr Wm                    125 K   Aug 14
   6304 Carr Wm                     97 E   Aug 20
   4139 Carroll James               69 A  July 28 64
  10293 Carroll P, Cor              95 E   Oct  4
   2061 Carroll F                  132 F  June 15
  12015 Carroll W                   42 D   Nov 15
   8563 Carson J G                 100 B  Sept 12
   8023 Cart M A                   118 F  Sept  6
   1987 Carter A                   146 E  June 15
   5212 Carter Ed, Cor         Art   7 A   Aug 10
   6433 Carson E                   115 A   Aug 22
  11640 Carney M               Cav   9 L   Oct 30
   8479 Case A F                “    8 A  Sept 11
   8377 Case E                  “    8 M  Sept 10
   6296 Case H J                “   12 A   Aug 20
   3832 Casey J                    100 G  July 23
   5271 Casey P                    174 A   Aug 10
   8241 Cassells Sam’l              52 D  Sept 11
   2643 Cassine Jno S          Bat  24 -  June 29
   1177 Castano J                  104 H   May 16
  10482 Cashel C               Art   7 I   Oct  7
   1785 Castle J W                 147 H  June 10
   6128 Castle Wm              Art   1 E   Aug 19
   1534 Cavenaugh John             146 H  June  1
   5971 Cæsar D                Art   7 B  July  7
   1466 Centre A                    16 A   May 29
   9682 Chaffe R A             Cav   5 H  Sept 24
  11101 Chambers J                 140 F   Oct 18
   6557 Chambers J                 147 E   Aug 23
   5860 Chamberlain C              154 D   Aug 16
   4768 Champlin W                  85 E   Aug  5
   4726 Chapel A                    85 D   Aug  4
   5478 Chapel R               Cav   6 A   Aug 13
   5831 Chappell A                  39 E   Aug 16
  10748 Chappell E                  76 K   Oct 12
   3222 Chapin F               Cav  24 A  July 12
   3286 Chapman J                   85 K  July 14
   1593 Chase A                    111 H  June  3
   4856 Chase D                     98 I   Aug  6
   5469 Chase N F                   85 K   Aug 13
   7450 Chase S M              Art   4 D  Sept  1
   2157 Chatbrim H             Bat  23 -  June 18
   8033 Chatman C              Art   6 I  Sept  6
   6653 Chatman S M                  2 F   Aug 23
   9919 Chatterton J                95 B  Sept 28
   7865 Chagnon E              Cav  12 F  Sept 25
   7189 Chesley P S             “   10 G   Aug 29
   7539 Chestey Jno                174 G  Sept  2
  10680 Chickchester C H            57 I   Oct 11
   6317 Childs A                    85 I   Aug 20
   4141 Childs Wm                   73 A  July 28
  11555 Chile H, Cor                47 E   Oct 27
  10612 Christey J            Drag   1 I   Oct 10
   5824 Church C L             Cav   5 C   Aug 16
   5413 Church F M              “    2 D   Aug 12
   4257 Churchill C                 99 I  July 29
   3449 Clancey Robb               164 E  July 17
   2114 Clark A                     85 E  June 17
   5167 Clark Chas             Cav  12 F   Aug 19
   2947 Clark F                 “    8 B  July  6
  12114 Clark J                 “    8 K   Nov 21
  12403 Clark J B, S’t         Art   7 L   Jan  6 65
   2154 Clark Jno                   48 D  June 18 64
  11304 Clark L                    100 G   Oct 22
  10611 Clark P                     42 B   Oct 10
   5802 Clemens A              Cav  15 F   Aug 15
   6909 Clements H                  65 F   Aug 26
  11028 Cleaver W                   43 F   Oct 16
    813 Clifford Chas               16 B   Apr 30
    740 Clifford Geo               132 K   Apr 26 64
   6494 Cline B                     85 K   Aug 22
  11437 Cline J W                   85 K   Oct 24
  12021 Cline S M             Drag   1 H   Nov 15
   9721 Cline W                     76 F  Sept 25
   6243 Clingman J                 150 L   Aug 20
  12471 Clinton R                  102 D   Jan 17 65
   1497 Clute H V              Bat  24 -   May 31 64
   5955 Clyen J P                  147 B   Aug 17
   7343 Coanas W                    73 D   Aug 31
   5365 Coburn C                   122 E   Aug 11
  10129 Coburn A                   116 H   Oct  1
    933 Coddington W                99 H   May  7
   7992 Cochran Jno                126 K  Sept  6
  11775 Cochran M                   42 A   Nov  3
   9237 Cochson J                  140 C  Sept 19
  10651 Cogger M                   125 B   Oct 11
   3715 Cogswell L             Art   6 M  July 21
  10062 Cole E B                “   14 B  Sept 30
   8456 Cole Geo               Cav  12 A  Sept 11
   6241 Cole Jno J              “    5 M   Aug 20
   5890 Cole M                 Art  15 M   Aug 16
   4142 Cole R S                   152 H  July 28
  11589 Cole F                     109 K   Oct 28
   4519 Cole Wm                     61 H   Aug  2
   7855 Coleby A               Cav   1 M  Sept  5
  10553 Coleman I              Art   2 I   Oct  9
   3070 Collins A                   98 B  July  9
   7557 Colwell D C, S’t       Art   2 E  Sept  2
   5743 Colwell J                  120 A   Aug 15
   6969 Comstock G E           Art   2 A   Aug 27
   3509 Condon Thos            Cav  22 F  July 18
   4320 Cone R                       8 A  July 30
   9619 Conely John                125 K  Sept 23
   5528 Conely Pat                 164 G   Aug 13
   8919 Conger James, Cor           49 A  Sept 16
  11347 Corvier Chas           Cav   1 C   Oct 25
   2160 Conkin A                    69 A  June 19
  10699 Conlin Daniel                5 A   Oct 11
  11513 Conell T                   139 C   Oct 26
   2033 Connelly F                  52 -  June 15
  10006 Coners E                    43 D  Sept 20
   4025 Connor Henry                52 D  July 26
    936 Conners John                99 D   May  7
   7842 Cosgrove F                  76 H  Sept  4
  11093 Cook C H               Cav   6 E   Oct 18
  11240 Cook Geo                    66 E   Oct 21
   7485 Cook G W                   146 E  Sept  1
   5228 Coombs B                    69 A   Aug 10
  10626 Coombs J                    96 I   Oct 10
   2195 Coons F                     52 B  June 19
  11418 Coom Geo F                  65 K   Oct 24
   3692 Cooney F                    14 G  July 21
  10723 Cooney T                    82 E   Oct 11
   5816 Cooper Jas             Cav  22 G   Aug 16
  12274 Cooper N                “   22 F   Dec 13
   1150 Copeland J                 106 I   May 16
   1778 Corbit B F, S’t        Bat  24 -  June  9
  10529 Corbit John                 24 C   Oct  8
   6662 Corless R              Art   7 E   Aug 24
   7182 Cornelius J            Cav  12 F   Aug 29
   1995 Corry P                     99 A  June 15
   6729 Correll O B            Cav   1 D   Aug 24
  11331 Cornell P                  100 C   Oct 23
  11347 Corrier Chas           Cav   1 C   Oct 23
   7471 Castin J                “   22 C  Sept  1
  12767 Corselman G                152 K   Mar 13 65
   7786 Cottin Z T                  85 E  Sept  4 64
   5329 Countryman ——              120 A   Aug 11
   3899 Courtney W             Cav  12 A  July 24
   8976 Cowen J                      4 I  Sept  7
   7058 Cox D                  Cav   1 H   Aug 28
   7675 Coy Jno H               “    1 L  Sept  3
  11158 Coyne M                     98 H   Oct 19
   7274 Cozin J                     82 E   Aug 30
   3601 Craft B                     48 D  July 21
   8221 Craig J                    139 H  Sept  8
   8328 Crandall D                  85 E  Sept 10
   8399 Crandall J, Cor             85 C  Sept 10
   2950 Crandall R                 115 I  July  6
   3061 Crandle J F                120 K  July  9
    334 Craven J                   134 E   Apr  2
   3432 Crawford Jno                61 B  July 17
  12649 Cripman S                    2 K   Feb 13 65
   8783 Crissman Josh              140 F  Sept 14 64
  11471 Crine C                Cav   6 C   Oct 26
   2311 Criswell J              “   12 F  June 22
   2882 Crocker J                   93 E  July  3
   5886 Cromark J, S’t              77 B   Aug 16
   2644 Crompter Jas                14 F  June 20
   8695 Cromwell T             Art   6 -  Sept 14
   3624 Crosby M               Bat  24 -  July 14
   2273 Crouse Geo              “   24 -  June 21
  11297 Crowley S                    2 B   Oct 22
   5893 Cuff S                      14 E   Aug 17
   7159 Culbert Wm                  39 D   Aug 29
   4119 Culver N L             Bat  24 -  July 28
   8960 Cunnings ——                 22 D  Sept 16
  11269 Cron F                     115 D   Oct 21
   5476 Cunningham J               170 E   Aug 13
   6721 Cunningham J                41 I   Aug 24
   1447 Cunningham Wm               45 B   May 29
   1204 Curley P                   125 E   May 19
   3627 Currey John                146 B  July 20
   4458 Custerman F                 47 G   Aug  1
   9540 Cute A                 Cav   8 A  Sept 22
   9611 Cutler C F, Cor              2 G  Sept 23
  12434 Cutler J P                  99 B   Jan 11 65
   4846 Cutler Wm                   59 B   Aug  6 64
   8493 Daher G                     66 D  Sept  8
   8650 Daley T                     42 I  Sept 13
  10741 Damon J D              Art   7 K   Oct 11
   3577 Dailey Wm              Cav   5 I  July 19
  11122 Daniels W O                 76 K   Oct 18
   5599 Daratt Louis               111 G   Aug 14
   1480 Daly Jno                    99 -   May 30
   6641 Dawson J                    47 K   Aug 23
   8095 Darley J, S’t          Art  14 D  Sept  7
   6726 Darling G H            Cav  18 F   Aug 24
   5083 Darling J               “    4 C   Aug  8
   7562 Dart Chas W                 85 C  Sept  2
   6404 Davidson M             Cav  15 M   Aug 21
   6391 Davis D                    164 G   Aug 21
   6037 Davis G                      1 H   Aug 18
   1383 Davis H                     85 I   May 26
   7670 Davis H                Art   1 D  Sept  3
   8089 Davis H J                   85 C  Sept  7
    961 Davis H R, Cor              99 I   May  8
  12652 Davis H T              Cav   5 G   Feb 14 65
   5129 Davis J                     85 H   Aug  9 64
   7894 Davis J J, Cor              43 B  Sept  5
  11017 Davis Jno                   47 E   Nov  5
  10241 Davis P, Cor                94 I   Oct  3
  10018 Davy J J               Cav   2 A  Sept 29
   5838 Day J W                     32 D   Aug 11 64
   3866 Dean                        43 E  July 24
   9400 Dean J                 Cav   3 G  Sept 21
   2305 Dean Jno               Art   6 K  June 22
  10523 Debrass J                    9 A   Oct  8
   9958 Decker A                    82 I  Sept 28
   3660 Deckman J G                104 B  July 20
   7505 Declercy W E            C   22 E  Sept  1
  10555 Dedrich P                    9 K   Oct  9
  12320 Deman W                     26 E   Dec 22
   7059 Dessotell J                 98 D   Aug 28
   7935 Deet F                      90 D  Sept  5
   4400 Deffer Louis                40 H  July 31
   4014 Degammo J                   48 E   Aug  6
   6283 Degroff C                  115 H   Aug 20
  12074 Degroot W              Art   7 I   Nov 18
  12238 Devit Chas              “    7 G   Dec  5
   7261 Delane M                   111 C   Aug 30
  11206 Delany C                    52 H   Oct 20
  12271 Demara Jno                 108 M   Dec 12
   5669 Demeres D                    5 A   Aug 15
  10163 Demerest H H           Cav   2 M  Sept 30
   8761 Demhart W                  111 F  Sept 14
   9592 Demming F M                 85 H  Sept 23
   7278 Dempsey Jno                 85 B   Aug 30
   7623 Demming L, Cor              85 D  Sept  2
   9930 Dennis A A                 106 H  Sept 28
   1489 Dennis Thos                132 G   May 31
   4090 Dennison J             Cav  12 A  July 27
  12257 Dennison J, S’t            155 I   Dec 10
   7461 Dennison W             Art  14 M  Sept  1
   3259 Denorf F                   147 B  July 13
   2320 Densamore S F              115 G  June 22
   6324 Densmore E, S’t             85 K   Aug 21
  12603 Desmond D, Cor              82 C   Feb  6 65
   1799 Deveny H                    99 I  June 10 64
   7598 Devlin A               Art   1 M  Sept  2
   5502 Devlin J               Cav  12 F   Aug 13
  10077 Dewise Dennis                7 E  Sept 30
   2839 De Witt S C, S’t           120 E  July  3
   9334 Dewitt J S                  48 H  Sept 20
   9855 Dickinson N                152 K  Sept 27
  10597 Dickerman W B A              6 A   Oct 10
  11854 Difendorf R            Art   2 L   Nov  6
   2234 Dykeman F                   47 C  June 20
  10089 Dingle J, S’t              122 G  Sept 30
   1821 Dingley C              Cav   4 A  June 10
   8588 Dighard F               “   15 A  Sept 12
   8245 Doan A                      85 C  Sept  9
   3773 Dodson E                    85 C  July 22
   2959 Dolan J                     48 E  June 14
  11805 Dolan M                Cav   6 F   Nov  4
   5658 Dolan P                     30 I   Aug 14
  11884 Domick E               Art   4 E   Nov  6
   4886 Donaghen J                  16 A   Aug  6
   2809 Doud Daniel                155 I  July  3
   6149 Dondall B                  111 G   Aug 19
  11357 Donely M                    10 F   Oct 23
   3081 Donovan J              Art  14 -  July  9
    229 Donley E J M        Rifles   2 K   Mar 29
  12718 Donnell W              Art   4 A   Mar  2 65
    655 Donnelly Jas C, S’t     C    2 D   Apr 21 64
  10102 Doolittle W                 76 D  Sept 30
   3533 Dorchester H S, V S     C   12 -  July 18
  12715 Dormity M, Citizen           - -   Mar  1 65
  10320 Dotsey J                   139 E   Oct  4 64
   9416 Dougherty E S               85 I  Sept 21
   4650 Dougherty J                  9 C   Aug  3 64
   2052 Dougherty O                 99 I  June 16
  10992 Doughty E S                 48 A   Oct 16
   9298 Downey H                    11 I  Sept 19
   5735 Downey J A                  85 H   Aug 15
   7275 Douglas M                   48 D   Aug 30
  10356 Douglas P                  147 C   Oct  5
   6149 Dondall B                  111 G   Aug 19
   2561 Doyle Jno              Cav   5 G  June 27
   4827 Doyle Jas                  120 H   Aug  5
   9142 Doyle W                Art   7 I  Sept 18
   9318 Dow M                      125 H  Sept 20
   3929 Drake D W              Art   2 H  July 25
   2317 Drake D B                  158 F  June 23
    699 Driscoll ——                 52 B   Apr 23
   2826 Drum A                     155 A  July  3
   9357 Druse I                Art  15 D  Sept 20
    394 Derfee Jas                  99 H   Apr  6
   3063 Dumfray Dennis             100 I  July  9
   3490 Dudley J C, S’t        Cav  10 H  July 17
   3957 Duell R                Art   6 F  July 25
   5264 Dumond A                    85 E   Aug 10
   5810 Dumond C                   120 A   Aug 16
   6773 Dumond S                     5 B   Aug 25
  10144 Dumond F                   146 A   Oct  1
   9116 Dunlap C                    85 B  Sept 18
   8669 Duane T                     95 E  Sept 13
   8453 Dritman Wm                  42 C  Sept 11
   6905 Duble Henry                 61 F   Aug 26
   6087 Dule Levi                    5 B   Aug 18
  10948 Duger P                     67 A   Oct 14
  11104 Dunham R               Art  14 G   Oct 18
   7621 Dunn J                      40 G  Sept  2
   8244 Dunn L H               Eng  50 E  Sept  9
   5732 Dunn Jas                    88 D   Aug 15
   1695 Dunn J H                    99 I  June  7
  10948 Devine P                    67 A   Oct 14
    123 Dunbar Thos                  2 F   Mar 23
   3234 Dunn M                      99 I  July 12
    919 Dunn Owen                  126 H   May  6
   1033 Dunn Pat                   149 A   May 11
   3584 Dunning Wm                 132 G  July 19
   2972 Dunsham Abr                120 C  July  7
   7554 Durand H                    82 K  Sept  2
   4832 Durand Jas E            C   10 E   Aug  6
   9616 Dyer S                 Art   7 D  July 24
   4086 Dyer Jno S             Cav  10 M  Sept 25
   3574 Dykeman D               “   22 F  July  9
  12274 Dunaram Jno                108 F   Dec 12
   9033 Earl C                      85 D  Sept 17
   2443 Earl H                     174 H  June 25
   3203 Eastern Thos           Cav   5 L  July 12
   3019 Eastman Wm L                10 C  July 25
   4239 Easton E E                  52 F  July 29
   4410 Eastwood E             Bat  24 -  July 31
   7440 Eber Jas                    76 B  Sept  1
   3552 Edmonds L              Cav   5 M  July 18
   4288 Edwards S                   52 F  July 30
   7309 Edson John                  64 D   Aug 30
   7850 Edson W                    105 E  Sept  5
   2728 Egan John                  125 D  July  1
   9454 Egerton H              Art  14 L  Sept 20
   2319 Elberson J             Cav  10 E  June 21
   7420 Eldeny B                   146 E   Aug 31
   6407 Eldred H                   125 K   Aug 22
   3597 Eldred I                    76 F  July 19
  10339 Ellis J                      2 H   Oct  4
  12071 Ellis P M                    2 E   Nov 17 64
   9736 Ellis C                     85 G  Sept 25
   7204 Ellis R H                   76 F   Aug 29
   8960 Elliott F P                 76 B  Sept 16
   8163 Elliott L              Cav   3 I  Sept  8
   1107 Ellis Wm                   119 F   May 15
   3526 Ells Perry                 106 I   Nov 18
   8274 Ellison W                   95 F  Sept  9
   6343 Elster James           Art   7 E   Aug 21
   9564 Elwell W                    47 B  Sept 23
   8152 Emery C Z, Cor              48 G  Sept  8
   6096 Engal W                     39 B   Aug 18
   9086 English G              Cav   7 I  Sept 18
   9961 Eagh John              Art   7 E  Sept 28
   2454 Easley W H             Cav   2 H  June 25
  10375 Erst J                      51 H   Oct  4
   2731 Ethear J               Cav  13 E  July  1
   9459 Evans Franklin             140 D  Sept 21
  12365 Evans L                Art   7 I   Dec 31
   6786 Evens B                     66 B   Aug 25
   6429 Everett J                   58 K   Aug 22
  11263 Everly G                   108 I   Oct 21
  11362 Faggerty C             Cav   2 C   Oct 23
   1622 Fallam Pat             Art   3 K  June  3
  11576 Famcle E                    43 D   Oct 28
   7666 Fairfax Chas               111 A  Sept  3
  12091 Farland T                    6 I   Nov 19
  11247 Farley W               Art  14 F   Oct 21
  10259 Farrell Jas                100 C   Oct  3
   5840 Farn C                     169 G   Aug 16
   5946 Fairman H B            Art  6 M    Aug 17
   6995 Fawry Jno               “   2 C    Aug 27
   7415 Face J                     115 E   Aug 31
  10057 Fareclough R                 2 F  Sept 20
   9609 Ferris C                   100 E  Sept 23
   8439 Ferris Robt            Art  14 I  Sept  3
   3452 Ferris Jno                   5 E  July 17
   4760 Felter F                    69 C   Aug  5
   7260 Ferguson H C                14 C   Aug 30
   7498 Ferguson M                  39 G  Sept  1
   7412 Felton Geo                 164 C   Aug 31
   8407 Feasel H               Art   7 F  Sept  3
   9779 Ferguson J M           Cav  15 G  Sept 26
  12507 Finnerty P                 155 G   Jan 22 65
    247 Fich Jno                     8 M   Mar 30 64
   3869 Fincucum Jno                96 E  July 24
   6192 Fields F               Art   2 L   Aug 19
   6656 Finch Henry            Cav  22 L   Aug 24
   8699 Finch Jas               “   22 L  Sept 14
  10072 Findley Andrew              70 D  Sept 20
  11482 Finlay A               Art   7 D   Oct 26
   6215 Fish L V                “    7 B   Aug 20
   4412 Fish H                     179 A  July 31
   5752 Fish F                      52 K   Aug 15
   9723 Fish J W, S’t          Cav  12 C  Sept 25
    279 Fish Wm                     17 H   Apr  1
  11651 Fisher C P                 124 C   Oct 30
  10049 Fisher Conrad          Cav   1 E  Sept 29
   5104 Fisher Daniel               45 F   Aug  9
   2389 Fisher D                   125 K  June 24
  12542 Fisher H                    59 K   Jan 27 65
  10966 Fisher L                    39 D   Oct 15 64
  10171 Fitch A                      3 F   Oct  1
   4819 Fitch C                Bat  24 -   Aug  5
   3569 Fitzgerald N               111 C  July 19
   6453 Fitzgerald Thos        Bat  24 -   Aug 22
  12400 Fitzpatrick            Cav  10 G   Jan  5 65
   6961 Fitzpatrick O              100 E   Aug 27 64
   6500 Flagler Wm             Art   7 M   Aug 22
   7452 Flanigan Ed             “    7 C  Sept  1
   5558 Flenigan P                  40 D   Aug 13
   8583 Fleming P              Cav  22 E  Sept 12
    190 Fletcher Wm, Cor       Cav  13 G   Mar 27
  12537 Flintkoff F                102 E   Jan 27 65
    774 Florence B                  99 H   Apr 28 64
   7690 Fluke J                     76 K  Sept  3
   8379 Flynn J                Bat  24 -  Sept 10
  11958 Flynn J                     13 K   Nov 11
   9242 Flynn Wm                    71 E  Sept 19
   9283 Fohnsbelly C               169 A  Sept 19
   8042 Folden H               Art   7 B  Sept  6
   3987 Folet D                Cav   1 A  July 26
  10841 Follard Jas             “    1 I   Oct 13
   4807 Foulke Peter               100 F   Aug  5
    175 Ford E B                   112 K   Mar 26
   7344 Foreber A              Cav  13 F   Aug 31
  11736 Foley F                     77 B   Nov  2
   1589 Forget G H, Cor             85 K  June  3
   2470 Foster H               Cav   1 B  June 25
    759 Foster J                “    5 G   Apr 27
    408 Foster James            “    2 D   Apr  6
   6115 Fox A                       49 K   Aug 19
  11173 Fox D                      152 A   Oct 19
   2830 Fox M                  Art  15 K  July  3
   9432 Frahworth F                 57 I  Sept 21
   8393 Frake S                     11 G  Sept 10
   2863 Francis P L            Cav   2 H  July  4
   9997 Franklin J                  39 I  Sept 28
   4227 Franklin J C           Cav  22 L  July 29
  10484 Fraser J H                  73 C   Oct  7
  11353 Freilander C           Cav   2 B   Oct 23
   4820 Freburg E                   52 F   Aug  5
   6619 Fredinburg Jas              85 H   Aug 23
   6668 Free C                      30 B   Aug 24
  11363 French J               Cav   2 H   Oct 23
  10968 French James            “   22 G   Oct 15
   6998 French John C           “    5 H   Aug 27
   1395 Freiser John               111 K   May  2
   5125 Frisby W L, Cor            111 B   Aug  9
  11421 Frositer F             Cav  16 L   Oct 24
   3806 Fuller A                    49 K  July 22
  11638 Fuller C                    52 H   Oct 30
   3713 Fuller J B                  85 F  July 21
  11050 Fuller N                    18 C   Oct 17
  10295 Fuller W                   122 A   Oct  4
  10328 Funday F                    39 B   Oct  4
  10140 Fricks A                    62 L   Oct  1
   2472 Gagan Thos                  85 C  June 25
   5773 Gale George                  2 A   Aug 15
   1148 Gallagher G            Cav   5 D   May 16
   6106 Gallagher P                 47 D   Aug 18
   4699 Gallewin Thos          Art  20 F   Aug  4
  10489 Galush W               Cav   5 F   Oct  7
   7678 Gandley J               “    3 F  Sept  3
   6993 Gannon S               Art   7 E   Aug 27
    385 Gansey ——                   94 B   Apr  5
   1153 Gardner H                   52 A   Oct 19
   5251 Gardner R                  155 K   Aug 10
    982 Gardner H                  132 E   May  9
   1313 Gardner O                  104 C   May 24
   9206 Gardner Wm             Cav   7 I  Sept 18
   7926 Garlock Jno                 46 B  Sept  5
   8982 Gaman J                    126 H  Sept 17
   8383 Garney C                    40 A  Sept 10
   7033 Garry Jas                   95 C   Aug 27 64
   2688 Garrison J                  65 H  June 30
   7216 Gartill H              Cav  22 L   Aug 29
   7044 Gartland ——                169 -   Aug 27
     94 Garbey Jno                  32 K   Mar 22
  10539 Gatiff H                    82 D   Oct  8
   5270 Garette C                  134 G   Aug 10
   6868 Gear Jas                   142 A   Aug 26
   7120 Gees A                      95 I   Aug 28
   7930 Geiser Chas                 39 D  Sept  5
   8878 Gemminge J             Art   6 -  Sept 16
   7650 Gesler Jas                  65 E  Sept  3
   6728 Gian Benj                   11 -   Aug 24
  10967 Gibbs Chas             Art   4 B   Oct 15
   6259 Gibbs M H              Cav  22 E   Aug 20
   3218 Gibson J                   170 A  July 12
  12017 Gibson J                    82 I   Nov 15
   6942 Giddings J                 115 H   Aug 26
   2042 Gifford H N                111 -  June 15
   4185 Gilbert E                   43 D  July 28
  10925 Gilbert E              Cav  22 B   Oct 14
   1834 Gilbert J                  111 K  June 11
  11270 Gillis G                    85 G   Oct 21
  10160 Gill Jno F             Cav   1 B   Oct  1
   2413 Gill Jas                   111 K  June 24
   3339 Gillen M                   107 E  July 15
   7898 Gillett Wm                  85 F  Sept  5
  12345 Gilmore M                   17 B   Dec 27
   3106 Gimrich P, Bugler       C    2 K  July 10
   1678 Gleick Wm              Cav   1 A  June  6
   3946 Gleason Thos                97 D  July 25
  10336 Goaner F                    16 K   Oct  4
   2553 Goffney J                  104 D  June 27
   8639 Goldsmith Wm                 2 F  Sept 13
   2962 Gond E                     104 C  July  6
   7088 Goodbread J F              147 B   Aug 28
  12529 Goodell F, Cor             122 K   Jan 26 65
   4145 Goodenough Jas, Cor        140 D  July 28 64
   7342 Goodman J A                154 A   Aug 31
   3042 Goodrich F                 154 B  July  8
   4561 Goodrich Geo, Cor      Cav   2 D   Aug  2
   1415 Gorman G               Art   3 K  June 17
   8228 Goodnow J                   64 I  Sept  9
  12604 Golt C                      49 D   Feb  7 65
   2203 Goss Jas                   132 G  June 19 64
   3322 Gould Richard               61 D  July 14
  11985 Gough H                    146 B   Nov 13
   3765 Gower J                    147 B  July 22
  10499 Graff F                Cav  14 M   Oct  8
   9347 Graham J                “   15 L  Sept 20
   7089 Graham Wm               “   12 F   Aug 28
  10093 Grampy M J                  52 D  Sept 30
   2640 Grandine D S               111 E  June 29
   3638 Granger A                   98 I  July 20
   5798 Granger John               107 H   Aug 15
   4131 Granner H                   62 I  July 28
   3212 Grant C                     96 B  July 12
   3875 Grant James, S’t           125 K  July 24
   6449 Grant J K                    9 D   Aug 22
   9511 Grass H                     42 G  Sept 22
  12200 Graves E               Cav   2 I   Dec  1
   4787 Graves W F                   2 H   Aug  5
   5354 Gray John              Art   6 H   Aug 11
   1342 Green E                     85 C   May 24
  12522 Green H W                  146 E   Jan 26 65
  10277 Green J H                  109 K   Oct  3 64
   6863 Greer John                  76 B   Aug 26
   5202 Green O                    154 G   Aug 10 64
   2184 Greenman J S, S’t      Cav   2 D  June 19
   7634 Gregory A D L              120 E  Sept  2
   4322 Gregory John                61 E  July 30
   7492 Gregory L              Art   7 M  Sept  1
   7201 Grenals H                   70 F   Aug 29
  11502 Griffin J B            Cav   7 D   Oct 26
   3816 Griffin John                40 H  July 23
   5766 Griffin N                   52 F   Aug 15
   3101 Griffith A             Bat  24 -  July 10
  11185 Griffith E P                85 D   Oct 19
   8351 Gilmartin A                 69 -  Sept 10
   3815 Griswold B F, Cor          109 F  July 23
   1220 Groncly M                   47 E   May 19
  10944 Gross C                     68 E   Oct 14
   9553 Gross J                    140 I  Sept 24
   9981 Gross J                    151 B  Sept 29
   3092 Groven Josh                 49 F  July 10
  10997 Grundy R J                  73 G   Oct 16
  10813 Gunan Wm               Cav   8 D   Oct 12
   5867 Gundaloch F                 95 A   Aug 16
   1459 Gunn Calvin            Cav  12 G   May 29
   6651 Gunnahan J                  85 G   Aug 23
   9372 Gunnell Jno            Cav   2 B  Sept 20
   8317 Guile A L, S’t             154 C  Sept 10
  12145 Guyer F                Art  15 A   Nov 24
  12328 Gwin Chas                   69 H   Dec 24
   6495 Hack J                      12 K   Aug 22
  10194 Hackett C                   43 C   Oct  2
   2623 Hackett ——             Cav  12 F  June 28
   7113 Hackett J              Art   7 D   Aug 28
   6876 Hagate Jacob           Cav  10 F   Aug 26
   4677 Hager ——                    52 H   Aug  4
   3646 Hager J                     59 B  July 20
   6869 Hagerty Wm                 147 E   Aug 26
   8275 Hadden C                    20 -  Sept  9
    473 Haddish T                   14 A   Apr  9
   7721 Hadsell F              Art   2 L  Sept  3
   8924 Haight J E              “    8 H  Sept 16
   2887 Hair G                      89 A  July  4
  11036 Halbert A H, Cor            85 D   Oct 16
   3342 Halbert L                    1 D  July 15
    170 Haline Gotfred          C   12 K   Mch 26
  11310 Hall C                Drag   1 H   Oct 28
   2214 Hall Chas              Cav  12 K  June 20
   5003 Hall Chas                  109 G   Aug  8
  12370 Hall C W                    40 I   Jan  1 65
    870 Hall Ed                    111 C   May  3 64
   2846 Hall Jas               Cav   9 E  July  3
   4459 Hall Jno                   109 E   Aug  1
   9661 Hall S                 Cav  14 L  Sept 24
   7731 Hall W C               Cav   8 K  Sept  3
   7819 Hall William                 2 K  Sept  4
  10865 Hallembeck S               145 B   Oct 13
   4175 Halloway J                 146 D  July 28
   9253 Halpin P                    68 -  Sept 19
  11049 Halper Jno                 134 F   Oct 17
   8213 Hamilton H                 132 D  Sept  8
  12405 Hamilton J                 111 G   Jan  6 65
  10032 Hamilton Jno           Art   6 L  Sept 29 64
   6601 Hamilton Thos          Art   6 L   Aug 23
   5634 Hammond M                   66 G   Aug 14
   1104 Hand L                 Cav   5 C   May 15
   9862 Hanlon Thos                180 F  Sept 27
  11076 Hand H S                   169 A   Oct 17
   3589 Hanks J                Cav   1 L  July 19
   3857 Hanley D                    22 B  July 24
  12448 Hanley Wm                   29 D   Jan 13 65
   6009 Hancock R              Cav   2 D   Aug 17 64
   1207 Hanor Frank                 12 G   May 19
   6432 Hansom C                    67 F   Aug 22
  11149 Hardy J                     95 C   Oct 19
   9363 Hardy I, S’t           Cav   5 I  Sept 20
  10101 Hardy W                     95 E  Sept 30
   7929 Hannom Jno, Cor            164 I  Sept  5
   1411 Haines Philip               85 I   May 27
   2383 Harp M                      95 I  June 23
   8323 Harper J                   126 G  Sept 10
  10115 Hanen F J                   52 C   Oct  1
   5550 Harris C                    63 E   Aug 13
   5482 Haynes H               Cav   5 I   Aug 13
   6784 Harris Thos                 85 C   Aug 25
   4056 Harris V S             Cav   8 M  July 27
   1378 Harrington Pat              71 D   May 26
  10384 Harrison Henry              76 K   Oct  5
   8362 Harrison O                  14 K  Sept 10
   2726 Harry A                    143 K  June 26
   4705 Hart D R                   109 D   Aug  4
   5148 Hart J                 Cav  12 F   Aug 15
  11524 Hart J                 Art   7 K   Oct 21
   8287 Hart S, Cor                146 B  Sept  9
   8337 Hart S                 Cav  22 M  Sept 10
   7432 Hartman J N                 40 H   Aug 31
    766 Harty John             Cav   2 M April 27
  10812 Hasket A                    39 I   Oct 12
   8758 Hasler M                   119 C  Sept 14
  11947 Hass J F                    49 F   Nov 10
   1891 Hathaway Chas          Bat  24 -  June 13
  10878 Hanse John             Cav   1 L   Oct 13
   2262 Haveland H             Art   6 -  June 21
  11461 Havens Geo                  22 G   Oct 25
   3826 Havens H                   141 A  July 23
   4814 Havens S, S’t              104 A   Aug  5
   8523 Haverslight H               66 E  July 18
  11629 Hawley W L             Cav   2 D   Oct 28
  10646 Hawley F                    76 E   Oct 11
   5355 Hayatt L P, Cor        Cav   1 A   Aug 11
  11786 Hayes C                      2 F   Nov  4
   8022 Hayes Edward                69 G  Sept  6
   9080 Hayes J                      6 A  Sept 18
  10904 Hayes James                 39 E   Oct 14
   1264 Hayes P                     35 H   Oct 21
   9134 Head Thos              Art   6 A  Sept 18
   3394 Haynes W C             Art   6 G  July 16
  10220 Hayner L                   125 H   Oct  2
  10662 Heacock R, S’t              66 H   Oct 11
   3581 Hecker C                    47 C  July 19
   6181 Heddle Wm              Cav   5 M   Aug 19
   3155 Hefferman D                132 C  July 11
   8135 Helafsattan J               63 K  Sept  8
  11382 Helf J C               Cav   1 G   Oct 24
   6828 Heller D               Art  14 -   Aug 25
   7330 Henderson N J               85 K   Aug 30
  10206 Hendfest J B               100 K   Oct  2
  11380 Henertes B                  15 I   Oct 24
  11733 Hilbert G                    5 E   Nov  2
   8336 Hennesy M              Art   3 K  Sept 10
   7196 Henyon W                    85 H   Aug 29
  10870 Heratage Thos                8 C   Oct 13
    196 Herget Jno                 111 A   Mch 27
   3119 Hermance F C, Cor      StM  20 A  July 10
  11996 Hermance J                 100 C   Nov 13
   4496 Herrick Chas                39 M   Aug  1
   6627 Henning C                  140 I   Aug 23
  10566 Hestolate Jno               69 -   Oct  9 64
  12104 Hewes J                Cav   1 A   Nov 20
  11193 Hewes R, Cor               100 C   Oct 20
   7605 Hicks W H                   99 I  Sept  2
     99 Hietzel C                   52 B   Mch 22
   9937 Higgins J                   43 G  Sept 28
    888 Higgins Wm                  99 B   May  4
   4058 Higley Geo                  85 F  July 27
   7652 Hildreth H                  85 K  Sept  3
   3698 Hildreth L C                88 D  July 21
    777 Hill A A                    44 G April 28
   8643 Hill A J, Cor                2 F  Sept 13
   8970 Hill Frank             Cav   2 K  July 25
  11998 Hill L                      22 B   Nov 13
  11912 Hill Wm                Cav  24 E   Nov  8
   3316 Hillman Geo                 85 B  July 14
   4454 Hines J                    126 G   Aug  1
   9060 Hingman A                  140 G  Sept 17
     31 Hinkley B              Cav   9 B   Mch  9
   6255 Hinkley D               “    1 E   Aug 20
   5331 Hinton J               Art  14 B   Aug 11
   2967 Hinton Thos, Cor       Cav  12 E  July  6
   7192 Hoag I                     196 A   Aug 29
    395 Hoag Jno A             Cav  21 L April  6
  11670 Hoar H J                   120 I   Oct 30
   2085 Hobbs J                      8 H  June 17
   2984 Hobson Wm              Cav  14 F  July  7
   6556 Hodge Jno               “   22 A   Aug 23
   6977 Hodgekiss A             “    8 M   Aug 27
   1027 Hofland Jno                132 E   May 11
   5010 Hoffman Fred                48 B   Aug  8
   3811 Hoffman H                   47 E  July 23
   4932 Hoffman H              Art   7 L   Aug  7
   6248 Hoffman N              Cav   5 F   Aug 20
   7718 Hofyenneck T            “   21 I  Sept  3
  11317 Hogan J                     63 F   Oct 22
   5449 Hogan Jno J            Art   6 M   Aug 13
    162 Horsenton E L               94 B   Mch 26
   6465 Holbrook G                  76 K   Aug 22
   6327 Holbrook J E                85 E   Aug 21
   5013 Holcomb M D                 95 F   Aug  8
   2204 Holcomb Theo                40 K  June 19
  11662 Holfe J                     48 E   Oct 30
   6475 Holiday S                   85 E   Aug 22
   2510 Hollands H                 115 E  June 26
   7218 Hollen M                   152 A   Aug 29
   2573 Hollendeck H J             120 G  June 27
   7051 Holliday S, Cor             85 K   Aug 28
  10624 Holmen J                    50 C   Oct 10
   7952 Holmes C                    85 A  Sept  6
   7104 Holmes E               Art   7 K   Aug 28
   5531 Holmes Henry                99 H   Aug 13
  12467 Holmes J               Art   4 K   Jan 16 65
   1504 Holstenstein H              48 E   May 31 64
  12298 Holtcaup B                  96 F   Dec 16
   7826 Homvighausen F             140 B  Sept  4
   7117 Hooker T                   111 D   Aug 28
   5369 Hoover A               Art  15 H   Aug 11
    514 Hoppock A              Art  15 H April 12
   8040 Homstead H                  22 A  Sept  6
   6114 Hore R, Cor            Cav  15 L   Aug 19
   2445 Hosford W F            Bat  24 -  June 25
   6094 Houghdalinger M            120 D   Aug 18
  10817 Houghteling C          Art   5 A   Oct 12
   5652 Hour Jas                   119 E   Aug 14
   7457 Hous A R                    96 C  Sept  1
  11099 Houslin E                   95 G   Oct 18
  11693 Howard A               Art   2 M   Oct 31 64
   8477 Howard J               Cav  12 F  Sept 11
   4387 Howard Wm                   39 A  July 31
  10114 Howe Geo               Cav  16 M   Oct  1
  12292 Howe S                      59 C   Dec 15
  11064 Howell C R             Cav   2 C   Oct 17
   6622 Hoye J                 Art   9 I   Aug 23
   7301 Hubbard A                   76 B   Aug 30
  10666 Hudson J A                 148 A   Oct 11
   9562 Hudson S R             Cav  15 L  Sept 23
   9387 Hull J E                “   24 E  Sept 20
   1462 Huff W S                   140 C   May 29
   7931 Huganer A                   85 K  Sept  5
     16 Huganer D M                 64 I   Mch  6
   7805 Hughes Jno                  93 K  Sept  4
  11191 Hughes M, S’t               82 K   Oct 20
   7287 Hughes Thos                 61 G   Aug 30
   2562 Hulet W                Cav  22 L  June 27
   7584 Hulse G                     99 I  Sept  2
   1474 Hulse W S                   47 G   May 30
   7113 Humphrey H, Cor             85 F   Aug 29
   2618 Humphrey Jas               155 I  June 28
   2898 Hunnell J                  100 A  July  5
    476 Hunt F J                    46 D April  9
   3365 Hunter E, S’t          Bat  24 -  July 15
  10978 Hunter J                   115 -   Oct 15
   9862 Hanlon Thos                180 F  Sept 27
   5841 Huntsmore G                 66 E   Aug 16
   5497 Hurlburt S B               100 F   Aug 13
   4430 Hurley Jno                  52 A  July 31
  12614 Hurrell J              Cav  10 E   Feb  8 65
  11851 Hutchings H W           “    1 D   Nov  1 64
   3112 Hutchings S A           “    5 B  July 10
   5024 Hutchings Wm           Art   6 G   Aug  8
    898 Hutchinson T           Cav  13 D   May  4
   8585 Hutchinson J                82 A  Sept 12
  11019 Hutchinson M, Cor           52 G   Oct 16
   9173 Huleson Wm E           Art   2 B  Sept 18
   8955 Hyde C                      14 F  Sept 16
  11083 Hyde G                      42 C   Oct 18
   8770 Hyde J F                    76 B  Sept 14
   7625 Hyland O                     5 D  Sept  2
   2106 Hyman J                     45 E  June 17
   2187 Imhoff R               Cav   2 G  June 19
   4019 Imlay E, S’t                95 A  July 26
   4359 Imman J P              Cav   1 A  July 31
  10549 Ingerson S             Art  14 G   Oct  9
   4685 Ingraham C B                85 B   Aug  4
   3428 Inier I                Cav   1 H  July 16
   4588 Irish G                     85 C   Aug  2
  11781 Ivespack W             Cav  15 E   Nov  3
   8159 Jaquays R                    9 L  Sept  8
   7596 Jack J W                    95 H  Sept  2
   6558 Jackson A              Cav   5 E   Aug 23
   9048 Jackson J                   43 K  Sept 17
  11391 Jackson T A                122 E   Oct 24
   5402 Jackson John S             109 F   Aug 12
   7253 Jackson Wm                  85 F   Aug 30
   6966 Jarmine Jas                115 I   Aug 27
   4795 Jamison A                   51 A   Aug  5
   3645 Jarvis E                   106 H  July 20
  11704 Jasper C               Art   7 D   Oct 31
   6671 Jay John                “    8 -   Aug 24
   9389 Jay John                “    2 G  Sept 20
   3984 Jeffrey B               “    9 D  July 26
   1120 Jelley John                 99 K   May 15
     29 Jenner Henry           Art   3 K April 19
  10757 Jennings C                 149 K   Oct 12 64
    744 Jewell J R             Art   3 K April 26
   9934 Johnson A                   74 C  Sept 28
  11182 Johnson A              Art   7 A   Oct 19
  12121 Johnson B                   63 D   Nov 22
  12477 Johnson B F                 82 H   Jan 17 65
  10118 Johnson H S                 85 B   Oct  1 64
   5916 Johnson H                  115 I   Aug 17
   6232 Johnson H              Cav  10 C   Aug 20
   7712 Johnson J                   89 I  Sept  3
  12546 Johnson J                  146 A   Jan 27 65
  10043 Johnson L W            Art  14 C  Sept 29 64
   5985 Johnson M                   96 H   Aug 17
   9495 Johnson P B            Bat  24 -  Sept 21
   8054 Johnson R                  111 A  Sept  7
   3427 Johnson R                  120 I  July 16
   4047 Joice Thos                  22 C  July 27
   7413 Jolley F                    93 E   Aug 31
   5980 Jones C N              Cav  10 C   Aug 17
   6898 Jones David                 85 H   Aug 26
  10769 Jones E C                  147 E   Oct 12
   3650 Jones E                    134 F  July 20
   4373 Jones G C                   20 -  July 31
   3282 Jones G W                   47 F  July 14
   5753 Jones H                Cav  10 I   Aug 15
   5582 Jones Jno                   76 K   Aug 14
  11855 Jones Jno              Cav   6 A   Nov  6
   2487 Jones R                     99 B  June 26
   4403 Jones Thos                 116 B  July 31
   5042 Jones Wm                    52 B   Aug  8
   8867 Jones Wm, Far           C    5 C  Sept 15
   8771 Jones J B                   22 F  Sept 14
   9528 Jourdan Barney         Art   7 E  Sept 22
   4188 Jule H                      51 E  July 28
   9107 Jump O                 Cav   8 -  Sept 18
   5198 Kahbaum E              Cav  12 F   Aug 10
  12170 Kane F                      82 A   Nov 26
    792 Kane Peter             Cav  20 - April 28
   8868 Kanope C                    49 -  Sept 15
   9194 Kapp D                     100 F  Sept 18
  10222 Kearney W              Cav  16 A   Oct  2
   8452 Keating M                  146 A  Sept 11
   4434 Keating Thos                83 L   Aug  1
  11075 Kean W                      47 I   Oct 17
   7387 Keers M                     49 A   Aug 31
  11756 Kehoe T                    155 A   Nov  3
  10341 Kelley M               Art   2 L   Oct  4
  10649 Kellar Jno                 140 E   Oct  4
   6739 Kelley D, Cor               45 C   Aug 24
  11100 Kelley J               Art   4 K   Oct 18
  10675 Kelley Jas                 146 K   Oct 11
   6997 Kelley Jas                  40 F   Aug 27
  10388 Kelley M                    63 -   Oct  5
   9676 Kelley P                   106 D  Sept 24
  12209 Kelley T, S’t               82 F   Dec  2
  10960 Kenarm Alfred               70 K   Oct 14
  11425 Kennedy M E                 82 K   Oct 24
   9865 Kennedy W                  132 D  Sept 27
  11244 Kennien F                    8 H   Oct 21
   3572 Kenney A W                  85 D  July 19
   1250 Kenney G W             Bat  24 -   May 21
   3671 Kenney M                     2 F  July 30
   4398 Kent E L                    85 I  July 31
   7403 Kenwell R              Cav   5 D   Aug 31
   1079 Keogh Peter                132 C   May 14
   5952 Kerritt Jacob              132 D   Aug 17
   5310 Kerr C L                    85 B   Aug 11
   2484 Kerr H                 Cav   2 L  June 25 64
   3915 Kertser T                  178 K  July 25
   2797 Kester Chas                141 F  July  2
   1622 Kettle Sol             Art   2 K   Oct 28
   9015 Keys R                      95 C  Sept 17
    650 Keyes O S, S’t         Cav   5 E April 20
   1932 Kidd Owen                  126 K  June 14
   4606 Killner Sanford            125 F   Aug  3
   1864 Kilmer J                     5 I  June 12
  10614 Kilson J                   115 E   Oct 10
  12026 Kimball S, S’t         Art   7 F   Nov 15
   3262 Kimberly C                  76 B  July 13
   7999 King ——                     99 I  Sept  6
   9816 King N                 Cav  21 G  Sept 26
   8738 King Sylvanus          Bat  24 -  Sept 14
   3787 King Richard, S’t           99 H  July 22
   3095 Kinsley D              Cav  12 H  July 10
   9689 Kinsley Jas            Cav   5 -  Sept 24
    239 Kinney Lucas                99 H   Mar 30
  11558 Kinney M                    42 C   Oct 27
   8400 Kinnie J                    76 F  Sept 10
    564 Kinsey B B, S’t            132 K April 15
   7977 Kinsman Jno E          Art  14 I  Sept  6
  12869 Kinsman W S                 86 I April 20 65
   4287 Kirby Chas             Cav  12 F  July 30 64
   7087 Kirkland I             Art   2 D   Aug 28
  12742 Kirkpatrick ——          C   12 D   Mar  6 65
   5589 Kittle E N, Cor            125 E   Aug 14 64
   8873 Kizer G W                   76 B  Sept 15
   4525 Knapp Henry            Cav  24 A   Aug  2
   5233 Knapp Philip           Cav  10 C   Aug 10
   2604 Knabe F                     48 C  June 28
   7949 Knight Wm                  142 C  Sept  6
  12818 Knowl H                     66 C   Dec 21
  11976 Kossuth W                   54 F   Nov 12
   8860 Krasipars K                 65 L  Sept 15
   9211 Krantz H, Cor               54 E  Sept 19
  12115 Kreit J K, S’t         Cav   1 L   Nov 21
  11948 Krelar A               Bat  13 -   Nov 10
   3892 Kroom C E                   64 G  July 24
   1208 Krouger G R                178 K   May 19
   8956 Lahey P                      1 D  Sept 16
   8447 Lacey P                Cav  12 F  Sept 11
   3601 Lacey Wm, Cor               85 K  July 19
  10736 Lackley P I            Cav   1 -   Oct 11
  10879 Lacks Lee                   22 G   Oct 13
   8372 Lacoster H                  85 -  Sept 10
  10527 Lader A                      9 E   Oct 26
   7156 Lagay Frank                118 B   Aug 29
     41 Lahey Daniel                82 I   Mar 13
  12775 Lahiff D                    42 K   Mar 14 65
  12100 Lake Wm                    146 K   Nov 21 64
   6487 Laman C                     39 H   Aug 22
   6381 Lamareux J                  76 K   Aug 21
  11893 Lambright A, Cor       Art   7 K   Nov  7
  11599 Lambly J                     1 I   Oct 28
  11318 Lampman W S            Art   6 M   Oct 22
  11213 Lampert R                   98 D   Oct 20
   9886 Larrabee E, Cor             15 D  Sept 27
   3283 Landers C              Art   7 -  July 14
  12214 Lane C                     146 E   Dec  3
   7462 Lane Chas              Cav   3 E  Sept  1
   2678 Lane G W                    85 C  June 30
  11499 Lane J W               Cav  15 M   Oct 26
   2288 Lang A, Cor                 85 F  June 21
     13 Lang Wm W             Drag   1 -   Mar  6
   8238 Langdon A M                 85 B  Sept  9
   4375 Lansing Wm             Cav  12 B  July 31
   3788 Lansop J                    85 D  July 22
  10096 Langen A                    39 I  Sept 30
   4871 Lampan L H             Bat  24 -   Aug  6
   8087 Larcks G                    85 F  Sept  7
   6631 Larkins M C                100 A   Aug 23
     14 Lasar Benj             Cav   6 F   Mar  6
   8956 Latey P                      1 D  Sept 19
    851 Lattaratta J, Cor      Cav   1 A   May  3
   4107 Laugha W               Art   1 M  July 27
   8162 Lawton J                    69 E  Sept  8
  10095 Lawrence J             Art   7 G  Sept 30
   4101 Lawson John            Cav   2 D  July 27
   6434 Layman C                   120 K   Aug 22
   2374 Leabrook John              157 B  June 23
   2119 Leach S                Cav  10 E  June 17
   1737 Lean W H               Cav  21 C  June  8
   7142 Ledderer Wm                132 G   Aug 29
   1944 Lee A                  Bat  24 -  June 14
   2169 Lee F                       15 F  June 19
   2572 Lee P                  Art   2 A  June 27
   9696 Lee Wm                 Cav   6 L  Sept 24
   8514 Legrist W                   11 E  Sept 10
   6399 Leichinger J           Cav   3 D   Aug 21
   3565 Leiner A                    39 B  July 19
  11697 Lenot V                     47 I   Oct 31
   2686 Lent A                 Bat  24 -  June 30
   7499 Leonard A                   52 B  Sept  1
  12076 Leonard C H            Art   7 A   Nov 18
   8987 Leonard J W                 85 K  Sept 17
  10065 Lestraff C             Art   7 A  Sept 30
   6150 Letch John             Cav   5 C   Aug 19
   8774 Levalley C                 140 A  Sept 14
   9045 Lewis C                     85 F  Sept 17
   3727 Lewis C F                   52 E  July 21
   1329 Lewis F A                    9 G   May 24
  11515 Lewis G W                  146 G   Nov  8
   8297 Lewis J                Art   1 E  Sept  9
   5115 Lewis P W                   85 B   Aug  9
  10365 Lickley P              Cav   1 E   Oct  5
  11551 Limbach S                    7 D   Oct 27
   8419 Linch J H                   76 I  Sept 11
   5845 Linchler F             Cav   1 E   Aug 15
  10559 Lindlay D                  147 E   Oct  9
   7815 Lineham Thos               125 C  Sept  4
   6759 Ling Jno               Art   4 F   Aug 25
     38 Link Gotlib                 54 K   Mar 12
  10073 Little C                    76 F  Sept 30
  10933 Livingstone A          Cav   1 C   Oct 14
   4543 Locher Conrad          Art  15 -   Aug  2
   5565 Lock A                      98 B   Aug 13
   2162 Lodge T                     12 A  June 18
   8246 Loftern H              Cav  12 F  Sept  9
   9722 Loftus M               Cav  11 E  Sept 24
   7010 Longs R                Art   2 A   Aug 27
  11591 Long J                      75 A   Oct 28
   7924 Long L                      40 I  Sept  5
   4514 Longle Wm              Art   4 B   Aug  1
   5464 Loomis Jno             Art  14 M   Aug 12
   9712 Loony C                     48 A  Sept 25
   9088 Lorzbran J                  64 E  Sept 29
  11906 Louis C                Cav  16 C   Nov  7
  12329 Love J                     125 A   Dec 24
   7146 Lovejoy F              Cav   1 I   Aug 29
  10248 Lovering F             Art  14 I   Oct  3
  12313 Lowery G                     7 A   Dec 20
   2568 Lowery Jas F               140 A  June 27
   9663 Laws H                 Cav  22 E  Sept 24 64
   8395 Lloyd S                     47 D  Sept 10
   9854 Luce V                     140 D  Sept 20
  10311 Lucia A                     95 H   Oct  4
   7268 Lurcock E              Art  14 M   Aug 30
   9002 Lutton O               Art  14 H  Sept 17
   5772 Lynch D                    164 A   Aug 15
   6895 Lynch F, Cor                43 K   Aug 26
    931 Lynch Pat                   99 H   May  7
  12683 Lyons Chas             Cav   2 M   Feb 10 65
   1427 Lyons Michael               99 E   May 28 64
   8419 Luch J H                    76 I  Sept 11
   6151 Lucha Jno              Cav   5 C  Sept 19
   8342 Lyons J H              Art   5 -  Sept 10
   6156 Lyons Thos             Art   6 G   Aug 19
   7913 Lyons W, Cor                47 A  Sept  5
     37 Mace Jeff                  134 I   Mar 12
   6665 Mace L                      48 H   Aug 24
  10850 Mack J                      39 D   Oct 13
   5016 Mackin Wm                   85 P   Aug  8
   3933 Madder P                   155 E  July 25
  10506 Madden F, S’t              122 E   Oct  8
   4822 Madden ——              Cav   1 D   Aug  5
  11257 Madezan Jno                125 B   Oct 21
   9798 Madison D                   75 D  Sept 26
  11714 Magrath G H                 61 D   Nov  1
   4028 Mahon E                    170 G  July 26
    122 Mahon Jas, S’t             132 K   Mar 23
   1422 Mahon Thos                 120 C   May 28
   5842 Mailer J R, S’t            134 B   Aug 16
  11679 Maine F O                   85 A   Oct 31
  11580 Mainhart F                  39 B   Oct 28
  12669 Makay J                      5 E   Nov 17
   7942 Mallock M, Cor         Cav   6 D  Sept  5
   9427 Malley S S                  16 K  Sept 21
   9457 Malone Pat                 123 F  Sept 21
   3234 Maloney C                    6 C  July 14
  11417 Maloney J                   73 G   Oct 25
   7600 Mandeville Wm               85 F  Sept  2
   2802 Mangin F               Art   7 F  July  3
  10623 Manning ——                  33 -   Oct  9
   7139 Manning M              Art   6 D   Aug 28
  10540 Manning Thos               125 B   Oct  8
   2952 Mannilly J                  74 C  July  6
   2856 March J                Cav  22 C  July  4
   4000 Marley John, Mus            53 E  July 26
   1123 Maron J                     99 I   May 15
  11764 Martaugh J             Cav   6 A  Sept  3
   3824 Marsh Ira              Art   6 M  July 23
   5407 Marsh J                    104 D   Aug 12
  11997 Marston A                   65 G   Nov 13
   3441 Martin A               Cav  12 F  July 17
    435 Martin C               Cav  10 A   Apr  8
   6543 Martin Chas                 42 G   Aug 23
  11600 Martin E A             Cav   5 C   Oct 28
  12208 Martin J                    39 G   Dec  2
   4321 Martin H                    76 H  July 30
   5086 Martin J C             Bat  24 -   Aug  8
   9164 Martin P                    99 H  Sept 18
   6293 Martin John            Cav  16 L   Aug 20
   1256 Martin Peter                40 I   May 21
   8003 Martin W                   142 F  Sept  6
   3939 Martin W B                  12 I  July 25
   8746 Martin W H             Art  24 M  Sept 14
   1073 Martin Wm              Cav  13 D   May 13
    676 Marvoney James             132 G   Apr 22
  10483 Mason F, Cor           Art  14 I   Oct  7
   2315 Martin Samuel               85 I  June 22 64
  11290 Masterson E                  2 D   Oct 22
  11296 Massen H L                  86 C   Oct 22
  10498 Maxwell J                   85 D   Oct  8
   1477 Maxwell Robt                48 D   May 30
  11788 Matthews W                 155 I   Nov  4
   4472 Matthews H             Cav  12 M   Aug  1
   2100 Mattice H C                134 E  June 17
   5651 Mattison R                  85 D   Aug 14
   4946 Maxum S G              Cav  12 A   Aug  7
  10519 McAllister J               125 I   Oct  8
   7995 McBride ——                  52 K  Sept  6
   4508 McCabe Jas                  88 D   Aug  1
   2517 McCabe P, S’t          Cav  12 F  June 26
    732 McCabe Peter            “    2 E   Apr 25
   2196 McCabe J                    44 C  June 19
   8324 McCafferty W               100 D  Sept 10
  10716 McCain L                    18 C   Oct 11
   9864 McCardell W            Cav  15 H  Sept 27
   7620 McCarten L             Art   9 B  Sept  2
   3413 McCarty D                  155 G  July 16
   4480 McCarty Deni           Art   2 D   Aug  1
   5122 McCarty I                   99 H   Aug  9
   9633 McCarty I              M R   2 K  Sept 24
   4759 McCarty Jno                 69 K   Aug  5
   6136 McCarty Jno                104 E   Aug 19
   1035 McCarty P                  132 K   May 11
   2965 McCarty S                   99 C  July  6
   6227 McCarty W              Cav   9 L   Aug 20
   8242 McClusky F                 173 E  Sept  9
   1344 McColigan Pat               99 F   May 24
   9266 McCauly J H                 47 G  Sept 19
   6440 McCloud Jno                 97 A   Aug 22
   4416 McConnell E            Art   9 -  July 31
   6012 McCord H                “    7 G   Aug 17
  11110 McCormick M                 93 K   Oct 18
   6697 McCormick H                 69 K   Aug 29
   9018 McCormick H                178 F  Sept 17
   3629 McCormick J                155 H  July 20
   6203 McCormick J            Bat  24 -   Aug 19
   7441 McCormick J                 43 F  Sept  1
  10258 McCormick P                 43 D   Oct  3
   1433 McCormick Peter             39 I   May 28
   5203 McCormick W                  2 I   Aug 10
   7730 McCraker B             Art   7 B  Sept  3
   8644 McCrass J                  148 -  Sept 13
   2279 McCrember M                 85 I  June 21
   8507 McCullen D                  57 F  Sept 12
  10778 McDavid J                    5 D   Oct 12
   6912 McDermott P                164 H   Aug 26
   8969 McDonald A             Bat  24 -  Sept 16
   7745 McDonald A H                85 E  Sept  3
   7140 McDonald B                  52 D   Aug 29
   4013 McDonald Jno               164 E  July 26
  12138 McDonald F             Cav  16 L   Nov 23
  10002 McDonald F, Cor             95 A  Sept 29
   7259 McDonnell Wm           Art  14 D   Aug 30
   8126 McDurie C                   71 -  Sept  8
   4089 McElray Jno                 43 I  July 27
   9581 McErmany P             Art   7 G  Sept 23
    338 McFarland A                 72 I   Apr  2
  12478 McGiben I                  170 B   Jan 17 65
  11116 McGowan Wm             Art   6 L   Oct 18 64
   4001 McFadden Jas                39 F  July 26
   2665 McGain I                    99 H  June 29
    354 McGeatte                    52 D   Apr  2
   3551 McGibney H                  85 E  July 18
   2756 McGiven Wm                 158 B  July  1 64
   8225 McGowan F                  170 H  Sept  9
    248 McGowan Jno                132 K   Mar 30
   1112 McGrath M              Cav  12 E   May 15
   4709 McGucker A, S’t        Cav   1 C   Aug  4
   4995 McGuire P                  140 C   Aug  7
   6827 McGuire P                   10 C   Aug 25
   3220 McGuire Pat                101 F  July 12
   8354 McHarty M                   69 A  Sept 10
   3233 McKabe J               Cav  12 F  July 12
   1168 McKenley J                  99 I   May 16
  12664 McKenna H, Cor              12 F   Feb 16 65
   5359 McKerchay J H               85 F   Aug 11 64
   9390 McKinney John               82 D  Sept 20
  10392 McLain R                    42 F   Oct  6
  10055 McLaughlin O                 9 F  Sept 30
   4268 McLorens R             Cav  20 M  July 29
   6850 McLaughlin J, Cor           63 D   Aug 25
   3611 McMahon C L            Cav   3 E  July 19
   6814 McMurrier Wm            “    2 L   Aug 25
   9969 McNamara Wm            Art   2 L  Sept 28
  10728 McNamirin B F               14 A   Oct 11
   5406 McNulty ——                  85 E   Aug 12
   3724 McPeak W               Cav   2 B  July 21
   7271 McPherson Wm           Art  14 M   Aug 30
   5868 McQuillen A            Art   6 L   Aug 16
   8889 McSorley G W                20 M  Sept 16
   3127 Mead P                 Art   1 C  July 10
    150 Megrame W H                 99 E   Mar 25
  10599 Melin A                Art  14 L   Oct 10
  11167 Melins W                    82 B   Oct 10
   2068 Menzie A               Art   3 K  June 16
   6042 Merritt H D                 76 F   Aug 18
   9353 Merkle J                    15 A  Sept 20
  12204 Merwin A               Cav   2 A   Oct 20
  11214 Merz F A                     5 I   Oct 20
   8906 Messing I                   39 A  Sept 16
  10116 Messinger C            Cav   1 L   Oct  1
   6462 Messirie J M, S’t       “    1 A   Aug 22
   2523 Metcalf A                   85 G  June 26
   3134 Meyers F                    45 G  July 10
   8852 Meyer H                     66 F  Sept 10
  11723 Meyers I                    57 F   Nov  1
   2896 Meyers W                    54 C  July  5
   4520 Michael ——                  66 A   Aug  2
  11780 Michells W             Cav   2 B   Nov  3
   3750 Midlam F, Cor           “   12 A  July 22
   2709 Migner H, S’t               54 D  June 30
   6202 Millard F J, S’t       Cav  12 A   Aug 19
    168 Millens Adam               125 E   Mar 26
   5520 Miller A W                  52 D   Aug 13
   4647 Miller C                   111 I   Aug  3
   6469 Miller Chas B          Cav  24 E   Aug 22
   3221 Miller F                   182 D  July 18
   5155 Miller F, S’t               99 -   Aug  9
   6865 Miller F               Art  15 D   Aug 26
  11516 Miller G A                 152 C   Oct 26
   6585 Milen Geo                   61 F   Aug 23
  11522 Miller Geo                   1 G   Oct 26
   3131 Miller H               Cav   1 L  July 10
  10627 Miller H W                  96 E   Oct 10
   8278 Miller J                    95 E  Sept  9
   5521 Miller Jacob                39 I   Aug 13
    628 Miller J E, Bugler      C    2 M   Apr 19
   9505 Miller Jno                  12 A  Sept 22
    708 Miller O                   126 G   Apr 24
   9986 Miller Wm              Art   2 C  Sept 29
   8063 Millerman G            Cav  22 B  Sept  7 64
   8862 Mills J J                   85 -  Sept 15
   2844 Mills S                Cav  12 A  July  3
   4854 Millspaugh F           Art   6 A   Aug  6
     79 Miline Jno                  95 G   Mar 20
   1889 Mindler Peter          Cav   1 -  June 13
   4771 Miner J G              Bat  24 -   Aug  5
   3618 Minie F                     99 F  July 20
   8080 Mitchell J                 125 E  Sept  7
   9939 Mitchell Jno               120 I  Sept 28
   7396 Milty Sam’l            Cav  12 L   Aug 30
   2486 Moe Jno                    120 I  June 25
   4121 Moffat J               Art   7 C  July 28
   5720 Monaghan                    66 D   Aug 15
   4441 Monihan J                   85 C  July 31
   4392 Monohan J                   73 D  July 31
  11537 Monahan P                   88 D   Oct 27
   4658 Monroe J R, Cor            111 G   Aug  3
  11961 Monroe A J                  22 G   Nov 11
   7453 Morgan M                    76 B  Sept  1
   8241 Monschitz J                 65 D  Sept  9
   1933 Monson Wm                   11 G  June 14
   7830 Monson Geo                   6 -  Sept  4
   5635 Monta Henry                 52 B   Aug 14
   3512 Montag Geo                  39 B  July 18
  11650 Moran D G                   40 G   Oct 30
   6565 Moran Thos                  85 A   Aug 23
   7732 Moram M J              Cav   3 -  Sept  3
  11621 Morearty I                   1 M   Oct 28
  10308 Morgraff Wm                 64 H   Oct  4
   8461 Moody C R                  100 B  Sept 11
   6423 Moody Thos                 147 B   Aug 22
   3108 Moony P                Art   3 K  July 10
   3651 Moony I                    188 D  July 20
   8417 Mooney J                    52 D  Sept 11
  10886 Mooney Thos                139 F   Oct 14
   2766 Moore A, Bugler         C   22 E  July 12
   7656 Moore C C              Cav   1 B  Sept  3
  11829 Moore C                Art   2 B   Nov  5
    658 Moore Martin                74 C   Apr 21
   1694 Moore S                     46 H  June  7
    442 Moore T H              Cav   5 M   Apr  9
    457 Moore W H                  125 F   Apr  9
   7767 Moore Jno                   39 H  Sept  4
   9778 Moore W S                   85 H  Sept 26
  10781 Morgan E               Art  14 -   Oct 12
   7563 Morgan E J                 179 C  Sept  2
  10631 Mortross D H           Art   7 L   Oct 10
    624 Morland H              Cav  21 H   Apr 19
   4686 Morris E               Art   7 K   Aug  4
   9914 Morris T                    65 C  Sept 28
   3780 Morris H                    71 F  July 22
   8031 Morris J               Cav   5 D  Sept  6
  11226 Morris J                    99 A   Oct 20
   5866 Morris J A             Art   7 G   Aug 16
   6069 Morris Jno                  70 B   Aug 18
  12387 Morris R                    66 G   Jan  3 65
   9673 Morris L R                  85 B  Sept 20 64
   7703 Morris T A, S’t            111 E  Sept  3
   4880 Morris Wm, S’t             102 G   Aug  6
   8638 Morrison W                   5 I  Sept 13
   9371 Morrison W             Cav   5 I  Sept 20
   7958 Morse E, Cor            “    5 L  Sept  6
  12511 Morse I                      1 L   Jan 23 65
    617 Martin Chas                 47 A   Apr 18 64
  10625 Martin G H             Art   7 L   Oct 10
   3181 Martin Henry                61 C  July 11
   7672 Mortimer Wm            Art   5 A  Sept  3 64
   7079 Mosher E                “    9 D   Aug 28
  10152 Mosier E                “    9 E   Oct  1
  11016 Mosier M W                   4 G   Oct 16
   2872 Moses L                     85 E  July  4
  12003 Motts C                Bat  24 -   Nov 14
   8711 Moss W S, Cor          Art   7 -  Sept 14
  11466 Mulcady W, S’t              42 E   Oct 26
   7997 Molcohy D D                 76 F  Sept  6
  11368 Mulgrave Jas                 2 C   Oct 23
  12240 Mullen Chas            Art   7 I   Dec  7
  11324 Muller P                     7 H   Oct 23
   6985 Mulligan J                  34 H   Aug 27
  11485 Mulish R                    48 A   Oct 26
  12155 Mullin J                    82 G   Nov 25
   4720 Mullington C, Cor      Art   6 H   Aug  4
   8370 Munger D                “    2 C  Sept 10
   8404 Murchison D, S’t       Cav   4 D  Sept 11
    146 Murphy Jno                  99 H   Mar 24
   5804 Murphy F                    61 B   Aug 16
   5918 Murphy L                   170 E   Aug 17
   6550 Murphy W S                  40 K   Aug 28
  11803 Murphy R, Cor               85 E   Nov  4
  10200 Murphy Martin           C    2 D   Oct  2
  12118 Murray J               Cav  23 F   Nov 22
  11273 Murray J                    47 I   Oct 22
   3389 Murry A                    118 C  July 16
   8947 Murry J                     39 C  Sept 16
  11519 Murry M John                63 F   Oct 26
   6218 Murny ——               Bat  11 -   Aug 20
  11954 Murrey M, Cor               98 D   Nov 10
   1560 Murville S                   1 C  June  2
  12494 Muselman J                   2 K   Jan 20 65
   1384 Myers E                    154 D   May 26 64
   4958 Myers H                     47 A   Aug  7
   9913 Myers H                Cav   2 G  Sept 28
   5000 Myers H L                  147 H   Aug  7
   8970 Myers J                Cav  20 M  Sept 16
   6221 Myers James                 66 K   Aug 20
   8973 Neal J                      22 E  Sept 16
  10587 Nedden J                    82 A   Oct 10
   7922 Nellman A                   66 I  Sept  4
   2541 Nelson B                    39 A  June 27
   6051 Nelson John                 82 D   Aug 18
  11062 Nelson John            Art   2 D   Oct 17
   3022 Nevens C                   100 F  July  7
   2985 Newton L C             Art  14 I  July  7
   4469 Newton R J             Bat  24 -   Aug  1
   4943 Newton Samuel D             85 G   Aug  7
   5227 Newton C W, Cor             85 K   Aug 10
   2258 Nichols A S                  2 C  June 20
   5109 Nichols D A                125 D   Aug  9
   7050 Nichols F E, Cor       Art   7 F   Aug 27
   9017 Nobles E                    14 A  Sept 17
  11533 Nolan M                      5 I   Oct 26
  11356 Nolan Pat                   88 D   Oct 28
   5050 Noonan E, S’t          Cav  16 L   Aug  8
   4633 Norman J               Art  15 H   Aug  3
    633 Northrop D                 125 H   Apr 10
   5228 Northrop V                  10 G   Aug 17
     17 Norton Alonzo              154 A   Mar  7
   4451 Norwood D F                 85 E   Aug  1
   4735 Nostrand C             Art   2 I   Aug  4
  12241 Nott S A               Cav  15 E   Dec  7
   2549 Nutt M                     126 D  June 27
  11681 Nutterville W                8 G   Oct 31
   5439 O’Brien D                   63 F   Aug 12
   9765 O’Brien M              Cav   1 A  Sept 25 64
   8036 O’Brien S               “    5 L  Sept  6
   1553 O’Brien W               “    8 A  June  2
   6270 O’Carrell F                 69 A   Aug 20
   7356 Och S                       46 D   Aug 31
   3530 O’Connell Thos              72 B  July 18
   2755 O’Dougherty J               51 -  July  1
  12397 O’Kay Peter                110 E   Jan  5 65
   9737 O’Keif C                   146 C  Sept 25 64
   9616 Olahan A                    65 F  Sept 28
  10069 Olmstead F H           Art   2 I  Sept 30
   6435 Older W M              Cav  16 L   Aug 22
   1448 Omat M                     178 B   May 28
  12150 Omma Jas               Art   7 B   Nov 24
  11404 O’Neil J                    39 H   Oct 24
   1988 Ostenhal L, S’t             73 C  June 15
     12 Osterstuck W               154 I   Mar  5
   6456 Osborne R H                 22 E   Aug 22
   2714 Osterhardt B S             120 C  July  1
  12269 Ostrander J                 86 A   Dec 12
    108 Ostrander J H              120 F   Mar 23
   6326 Otis Jno                    94 A   Aug 21
   8768 Otto Chas                  100 F  Sept 14
    656 Otto Jas L, Cor        Cav  12 E   Apr 21
   5447 Owens Ed                    47 G   Aug 12
  12227 Owens Wm                    49 I   Dec  5
   7504 O’Reilly Philip        Art   2 I  Sept  1
   9319 Page O D                   146 F  Sept 20
   2825 Palmer P H                  85 D  June 22
   2582 Palmer F                    17 F  June 27
   6753 Pallette D             Cav  15 K   Aug 24
     20 Palmiter R, Cor             86 D   Mar  7
   5958 Pamperin Wm                 71 H   Aug 17
   3350 Pardy E                     85 K  July 15
   5710 Parish D                   146 E   Aug 15
  12180 Parker F, Cor              128 C   Nov 27
   2092 Parker I                    85 I  June 17
   2819 Parker Isaac               124 G  July  3
   1392 Parker J                    80 I   May 26
   2953 Parker J                   154 G  July  6
   3886 Parker J               Cav  15 F  July 16
   4732 Parkinson A            Art   4 C   Aug  4
  11956 Parks Wm                   109 K   Nov 11
  11218 Parsons W                   64 E   Oct 20
   9487 Patterson D                 76 D  Sept 21
   5880 Patterson E            Art   6 M   Aug 16
   3440 Patterson G W           “   15 M  July 17
   6165 Patterson H            Cav   1 -   Aug 19
   5279 Patterson I H               85 F   Aug 11
   4708 Patterson J H               85 G   Aug  4
  10368 Paul P                      39 L   Oct  8
   6696 Pease Martin           Cav   2 C   Aug 24
   2166 Peck J G                “   22 F  June 19
  11630 Peckins L               “    2 A   Oct 28
  11673 Pedro Francis           “   12 E   Oct 30
   1542 Pellet Ed               “   15 I  June  1
   3781 Pen R                   “    2 F  July 22
   2763 Pinablin Jno                69 F  July 12
  11348 Pen Chas               Art   6 D   Oct 23
   7398 Perkey D                    85 B   Aug 31
   7172 Perkins J P            Bat  24 -   Aug 29
  10562 Perry A, Cor                39 G   Oct  9
   4527 Perry Jno                   84 D   Aug  2
   7866 Perry W                Cav   2 B  Sept  5
   3721 Perry Wm                    99 E  July 21
  12182 Perry Wm                    79 A   Nov 27
   4517 Person A                    61 H   Aug  2
   3082 Persons W B                 64 B  July  9 64
   5224 Peters Fritz                52 C   Aug 10
   3914 Peters J                   114 F  July 25
   5684 Peterson C                 178 I   Aug 15
   9120 Peterson H                  48 B  Sept 18
   3302 Pettis L P                 100 F  July 14
   5727 Petrie Josh                 81 I   Aug 13
    486 Phelps Martin              132 G   Apr  9
   4235 Phillips Geo A              85 B  July 29
  12481 Phillips I             Cav   6 E   Jan 17 65
   7637 Phillips H, S’t            100 H  Sept  2 64
   3318 Phillips R, Cor             85 B  July 14
   4152 Pierce Albert          Art   2 M  July 28
   2459 Pierce Chas                 73 F  June 25
   5371 Pierce H, Cor               85 B   Aug 11
   6027 Pierce J                    85 D   Aug 18
  11663 Pierce J H             Cav   8 -   Oct 30
   6005 Pierson J                   76 B   Aug 17
   9422 Pilseck E                   61 I  Sept 21
   1532 Pinmon John                 99 I   May 31
   9994 Pitts G                     97 K  Sept 29
  11441 Pivant M                    61 D   Oct 25
   6086 Place E                     47 F   Aug 18
    815 Plass H                    120 G   Apr 30
  11379 Plunkett J                 146 A   Oct 24
   9549 Polack J                    85 C  Sept 23
   4432 Pollock R              Cav  16 L  July 31
   1843 Pomroy C                “   21 G  June 11
   4531 Ponteis G               “   16 K   Aug  2
   1830 Popple W G                  85 B  June 11
  11120 Pope Jas E             Art  15 A   Oct 18
  12291 Post H E                   125 G   Oct 15
  12425 Post J A                    94 E   Jan 10 65
   6385 Potter H                    48 E   Aug 21 64
   1582 Potter W H, S’t             85 F  June  3
   5116 Powell Geo             Art   7 H   Aug  9
   2948 Powers J               Cav  24 H  July  6
   3367 Powers J                    10 K  July 15
   6890 Powers O               Art   6 I   Aug 21
   5435 Pratt B F                  146 G   Aug 12
   1394 Presselman C           Cav   4 M   May 26
   5523 Preston H G                  9 G   Aug 13
   1096 Price David                154 A   May 14
  12346 Price J, Citizen             - -   Dec 27
   6455 Pratt P                Bat  24 -   Aug 22
   1651 Priest W                   132 E  June  5
   1479 Pratt G B              Cav  10 D   May 30
   7964 Pringler Thos W, Cor       118 A  Sept  6
   6914 Prow Jno               Art  14 L   Aug 26
   9668 Prowman S H                149 H  Sept 24
   9937 Puff I                 Art  15 -  Sept 28
   2321 Puley Daniel               115 I  June 22
    729 Pullers U H                132 E   Apr 25
   2395 Putnam L               Art  14 L  June 24
   1515 Purkey Jacob                84 B   May 31
   4063 Purstle S                   49 A  July 27
  11432 Prunan L, Cor              147 H   Oct 24
   9046 Quackenbuss P               11 K  Sept 17
   8227 Quigley J                   99 I  Sept  9
   8064 Quinn Edser            Cav  10 B  Sept 27
   4305 Randolph ——                  9 E  July 30
  11648 Rafbrun W                   59 C   Oct 30
    512 Rafferty M                 132 G   Apr 12
   2534 Rafferty P             Cav   5 M  June 26
  11330 Rafferty T             Art   5 B   Oct 23
   4593 Raker L                Cav   1 E   Aug  3
   3751 Ranch J                    100 D  July 22
  10875 Randall Jno                 99 A   Oct 13 64
   6503 Ralinger J                  47 B   Aug 22
   6794 Rangheart Jno              100 A   Aug 25
   7778 Rasterfer Jno              100 A  Sept  4
   4216 Rattery Jno                104 I  July 26
  10937 Ray C                  Cav   3 B   Oct 14
  10246 Ray R S                    154 A   Oct  3
   4336 Raynard F                  125 -  July 30
   3435 Rattersboon J          Art   3 K  July 17
   2880 Ramsay Isaac                86 I  July  4
   1265 Ramsay Hiram                31 K   May 21
   2186 Reamer W C                 111 B  June 19
   2820 Redman J               Art   3 K  July  3
  11695 Reddo D V              Cav   8 M   Oct 31
   7232 Reed F A                    64 E   Aug 30
   8574 Reed J                     140 H  Sept 12
    406 Reed S G                    13 B   Apr  6
   6041 Reed W D                   146 H   Aug 18
  10232 Reed W J                    41 I   Oct  2
   8492 Reed Wm                Art  14 I  Sept 11
   7369 Reetz Jno                   52 A   Aug 31
   5694 Reeve G                    152 C   Aug  5
   1680 Reeves Jno                  57 H  June  6
  10467 Redmond J                   43 C   Oct  7
  10911 Regler W H             Cav  22 M   Oct 14
   9122 Reiley P O                 164 B  Sept 18
   7195 Reuback C                   29 -   Aug 29
  12455 Rebman J                    59 C   Jan 15 65
   8431 Rencermane J R          C    5 B  Sept 11 64
   9320 Randall A B                 76 F  Sept 20
   3352 Remson C               Cav   2 M  July 15
   8209 Reynolds O                 155 E  Sept  8
   6799 Reynolds O S                85 E   Aug 25
  10265 Reynolds Samuel             92 H   Oct  3
   6350 Reynolds Wm                140 I   Aug 21
   6546 Reidy J D                   65 I   Aug 23
   4318 Rice F, Cor                 39 I  July 30
   3077 Rich T D               Bat  24 -  July  9
  12289 Rich J                      82 C   Dec 15
   3561 Richey R                    66 C  July 18
   2427 Rider E                    178 E  June 24
   8005 Rhenebault R H              21 B  Sept  6
  11904 Rehn W                 Art   7 C   Nov  7
   3891 Richistine C, Cor          132 D  July 24
   5317 Richards A                  52 D   Aug 11
   5674 Richards A                  41 E   Aug 14
  12243 Richards A                   9 C   Dec  7
   3682 Richards H                  47 E  July 21
   7578 Richards N J, S’t          146 C  Sept  2
   4240 Richardson H M          C   20 M  July 29
  12193 Ricker M               Art   2 M   Nov 29
   8155 Rickhor J                   85 E  Sept  8
    415 Rikel Robert               125 G   Apr  7
  12382 Riley I                     73 E   Jan  2 65
   2885 Riley J                     99 C  July  4 64
   5021 Riley John                 176 C   Aug  8
   6347 Riley John                  39 D   Aug 21
  11163 Ripley F A                 152 C   Oct 19
  11760 Ripp W                      42 B   Nov  3
   3514 Rising C                    75 B  July 18
  10610 Risley Geo W                46 G   Oct  4
   2558 Ritcher F, S’t             132 D  June 27
   7245 Ritson S               Cav  18 E   Aug 29
   9224 Ritzmiller Jno             115 -  Sept 19
   1775 Roach F                     99 F  June  9
   1842 Roach Chas                  85 E  June 11
   2354 Robberger P H               46 B  June 23
  11195 Roberson C A               122 B   Oct 20 64
   2346 Robertson W H              134 B  June 23
   8554 Robertson W M               96 B  Sept 12
   9970 Robinson H                  39 K  Sept 28
   7607 Robinson A                 111 I  Sept  2
   3880 Robinson H C                95 I  July 21
   6419 Robinson Jno               115 A   Aug 22
     27 Robins L, Cor              154 K   Mar  8
   7663 Roberts A                  173 C  Sept  3
   7585 Rockwell N C            A   14 D  Sept  2
   8318 Rockfeller R E              85 D  July 23
  11342 Rockfeller H           Art  15 M   Oct 23
   3959 Rock F                  “    6 F  July 25
   4350 Rogers A                “    7 I  July 31
   6059 Rogers A                   125 H   Aug 18
   5791 Rogers G, Mus               85 F   Aug 15
   3011 Rogers Jas                 132 H  July  7
   4287 Rogers H C                  85 C  July 30
   8369 Rogers H J             Art   2 E  Sept 10
   4912 Rogers M                    43 D   Aug  6
   7208 Rogers O S, S’t             85 C   Aug 29
   6824 Rogers Thos                 12 F   Aug 25
  11772 Romer F                      9 A   Nov  3
   8468 Rook G                 Art   6 E  Sept 11
   9663 Rooney Jno                 152 G  Sept 28
   9102 Rooney M                   132 F  Sept 18
   8922 Rooney P               Art   2 C  Sept 16
   5669 Root A N                    85 C   Aug 14
   2998 Roots W T                  120 H  July  7
   1735 Root Legrand           Bat  24 -  June  8
  10278 Rose A                      16 L   Oct  2
   9550 Rosecrans J E              125 H  Sept 23
   8171 Ross C                 Cav  23 A  Sept  8
   3874 Ross E F                   111 I  July 24
   5591 Ross David                  27 D   Aug 14
   6741 Ross G                      76 K   Aug 24
   9751 Ross A                 Cav   1 M  Sept 25
  11963 Ross J H                   121 G   Nov 11
   5929 Rosenbarger Jno              4 D   Aug 17
   3616 Rosser Lewis                84 A  July 20
   2924 Rosenburg J                 30 A  July  5
   8737 Rosson Chas            Cav  24 E  Sept 14
  12259 Roswell J                   93 K   Dec 10
    727 Ross Jacob                 151 A   Apr 25
   1940 Row W J                    120 B  June 14
   5097 Roth Louis                  39 D   Aug  9
   8504 Rothwell M, Cor        Cav  20 M  Sept 12
   3720 Rouge Wm, Bug           C   12 F  July 21
   7709 Rowbotham R C               11 L  Sept  3
   5857 Rowell J E                  70 G   Aug 16
   3492 Rowell L N                  99 H  July 17
     59 Roberts A B, S’t       Cav   8 B   Mar 18
   2609 Ruddin C                   120 H  June 28
    867 Rudler Wm                  120 M   May  3
     40 Rue Newton, S’t        Cav   5 A   Mar 13
   8667 Runey F                     69 H  Sept 13
  12635 Russ Jno                     2 K   Feb 10 65
   8856 Russell J, Cor         Art   7 A  Sept 15 64
   5094 Ryan D                     106 D   Aug  8
   8599 Ryan J                      95 E  Sept 12
   8741 Ryan J                 Cav  22 E  Sept 14
   7258 Ryan Owen                   12 A   Aug 30
   4762 Ryonch Jno                  66 I   Aug  5
   6413 Ryson Jno               Art  7 L   Aug 22
   6206 Ryne J M                    39 E   Aug  9
    684 Rush Jno                   111 E   Apr 23
   7234 Sackett R S                 85 G   Aug 29
   1920 Sadley M                    77 H  June 14
   1880 Safford B J            Bat  24 -  June 12
  11870 Salsbury H             Art   1 M   Nov  6
  10652 Salisbury E                 16 D   Oct 11
  10923 Samlett ——             Cav  13 I   Oct 14
  10880 Samet W                     15 H   Oct 13
   3769 Sampson J                  106 K  July 22
    346 Sanders Chas, Cor      Mil   9 A   Apr  2
   3618 Sanders J                   99 C  July 23
   9857 Sanders J              Cav  12 A  Sept 27
   4423 Sandford P O           Art   7 L  July 31
   2341 Saughin J              Cav  12 F  June 23
   7740 Sawyer J                “    2 L  Sept  3
  11232 Sayles A                “   22 E   Oct 21
   3612 Seaman A, Cor               85 H  July 19
  10856 Seaman A               Art   2 -   Oct 13
   1372 Sears F                Cav   2 H   May 25
   6120 Seagher J                    8 M   Aug 19
   4325 See Henry                   11 K  July 30
   8824 Seeley A J                 140 A  Sept 15
  11374 Seeley C B                  15 H   Oct 24
   4256 Seeley Thos                100 F  July 29
  10027 Segam Ed               Cav   5 K  Sept 29
   4204 Seigler Geo                 10 -  July 29
   7458 Seigle John R              120 K  Sept  1
  11886 Selson H                    59 C   Nov  6
   3457 Serrier R                   40 C  July 17
   1746 Serine C               Cav   4 M  June  8
    629 Settle Henry                99 H   Apr 19
   9828 Seyman F               Cav   1 A  Sept 27
   5951 Seard Louis                 77 E   Aug 17
   6888 Schayler J W           Cav  21 M   Aug 26
  10794 Schadt Theo                160 A   Oct 12
   3557 Scheck B               Cav   2 G  July 18
   3190 Schemerhorn H              120 G  July 12
  11965 Schempp M              Art   7 F   Nov 11
   2795 Schermashie B              170 A  July  2
   1325 Schlotesser J, S’t          91 H   May 24
  11515 Schlotesser J                1 L   Oct 26
   9578 Schmaker Jno                30 B  Sept 23
  10291 Schmaley J                   1 G   Oct 16
  10550 Schmeager A                 39 A   Oct  9
   5311 Schneider Chas              39 A   Aug 11
   8595 Shockney T T           Bat  24 -  Sept 12
   8796 Schofield J                  7 H  Sept 15
   2441 Scholl Jno                  54 D  June 25
  11422 Schriber H                  59 I   Oct 24
   7814 Schroeder G            Art   7 E  Sept  4
   8550 Schrum J                “   14 K  Sept 12
   1070 Schrimer Wm                 20 B   May 13
   4280 Schware F              Cav  12 K  July 20
   6613 Schwick A                   66 G   Aug 23
   4849 Scott J C, S’t              85 K   Aug  6
   6857 Scott P C              Cav  14 G   Aug 26
   8622 Scott W W               “    2 F  Sept 13
   8290 Sibble W                   148 G  Sept  9
   4362 Sick R E                     - -  July 31
   4557 Sickler E              Art   7 E   Aug  2
   3210 Sickles A                  120 D  July 12
  11950 Siddell G                   40 -   Nov 10
  12284 Simmons A              Art   8 H   Dec 13
   6364 Simmons C G, S’t            85 B   Aug 21
   8316 Simon H                    116 B  Sept 10
   6284 Simons H L, S’              85 E   Aug 20
    142 Simondinger B              155 I   Mar 24
    242 Simpson D                   99 H   Mar 30
   6345 Sisson P V, S’t        Art  22 M   Aug 21
  10067 Shaab J                     50 A  Sept 30 64
    201 Shea Pat, Drum’r            61 M   Mar 28
   4801 Shaffer M              Art   7 -   Aug  5
   4584 Shaffer J                   66 E   Aug  2
    782 Shafer H                   103 F   Apr 28
   6747 Shaughnessey J          C    6 A   Aug 24
   4446 Shannan E              Art   6 H   Aug  1
   5645 Shenk S W              Bat  24 -   Aug 14
    290 Shaw Alex              Art   3 K   Apr  1
   9667 Shaw T I               Cav  15 M  Sept 24
  12814 Shaw W                 Art   7 F   Mar 25 65
   7660 Shay John                   69 B  Sept  3 64
   3360 Sheldon M              Art   7 B  July 15
   4247 Shepardson L, Cor      Cav  22 E  July 29
   5474 Shaw J                  “    2 E   Aug 13
   7798 Shuler Chas                 52 G  Sept  4
   8335 Shaw M                      76 D  Sept 10
   9924 Sheppard W H                 9 F  Sept 28
   8205 Sherer H               Cav   5 -  Sept  8
  10930 Sherridan J             “    2 -   Oct 14
   4676 Sherwood J E                76 G   Aug  4
    720 Shields Richard            132 F   Apr 25
    701 Shilts E                    52 K   Apr 23
  10495 Shidler Geo                 97 F   Oct  8
   8206 Shindler J             Art  15 E  Sept  8
   7437 Shirlock R                  85 K  Sept  1
   5837 Shippey F                   85 D   Aug 16
   2430 Shirley P              Bat  24 -  June 23
   2151 Shats C                    111 F  June 18
   5755 Shortey Robert             164 B   Aug 15
   5343 Shotliff J, S’t        Art   7 L   Aug 11
   2975 Shults Jno                 118 F  July  7
   6633 Shultz F                    76 F   Aug 23
  12194 Shultz Wm              Art   7 C   Nov 29
  11822 Shultz C, Cor               66 F   Nov  5
  11813 Shumaker P                 100 K   Nov  4
  11280 Shuhps P D                 125 K   Oct 22
   2462 Shuster ——                  54 C  June 25
   2922 Slater F                    48 F  July  5
    700 Slater Jno                 120 H   Apr 23
  12534 Slater Jas, S’t              7 K   Jan 27 65
  11162 Slater Richard               2 E   Oct 19 64
  12811 Sleight C                   32 I   Mar 24 65
  10377 Sloat Wm                   140 E   Oct  5 64
   6819 Sloates F                   76 F   Aug 25
  10125 Slimp W                    146 A   Oct 11
   7628 Smades W                     9 D  Sept  2
  12083 Small S                     53 F   Nov 18
   7783 Smarty Jno             Cav  22 G  Sept  4
   7406 Smead L                Art  18 D   Aug 31
    762 Smalley Geo                140 H   Apr 27
  12503 Smith A                Art   7 F   Jan 21 65
  11371 Smith A                      9 A   Oct 23 64
   7326 Smith A J                   85 D   Aug 30
    802 Smith Bernard, Cor         132 B   Apr 29
   1310 Smith Benjamin          C    2 H   May 23
   2659 Smith Chas                  61 A  June 29
   3735 Smith Chas                  52 E  July 21
   4534 Smith Chas                 100 B   Aug  2
   7612 Smith Chas             Art  15 K  Sept  2
  10052 Smith Chas                   9 G  Sept 30
  11283 Smith E                     61 D   Oct 22
   1819 Smith F                     48 F  June 10
   1246 Smith Frank                 99 I   May 20
  11839 Smith G R              Cav   2 H   Nov  5
   3872 Smith N                 “    9 C  July 15
   1247 Smith Henry                132 C   May 20
   3238 Smith J                Cav   5 -  July 12 64
   3504 Smith J                 “    4 B  July 18
   4834 Smith J                    115 G   Aug  6
   9300 Smith J                     52 A  Sept 20
  10456 Smith J, Cor           Cav  13 D   Oct  7
  12627 Smith J                     46 E   Feb 10 65
   1245 Smith Jas              Cav  20 M   May 20 64
   7004 Smith Jas                    6 A   Aug 27
  11787 Smith Jas                   57 B   Nov  4
   7610 Smith Jackson               85 I  Sept  2
  11210 Smith J                     52 A   Oct 20
    305 Smith Jno                   71 C April  1
    534 Smith Jno              Cav   3 E April 14
   5496 Smith Jno                   41 E   Aug 13
   5602 Smith Jno                   66 F   Aug 14
   6428 Smith Jno                   95 D   Aug 22
  10547 Smith Jno                   69 G   Oct  9
   5882 Smith Jno J                109 C   Aug 16
  11454 Smith J M                   59 A   Oct 25
  10079 Smith K                Cav  22 K  Sept 30
   5009 Smith L A                  115 F   Aug  8
   9973 Smith Levi                 125 B  Sept 28
   7706 Smith John C, Cor           48 E  Sept  3
   2780 Smith S                     11 I  July  2
   5854 Smith S A                  132 F   Aug 16
   6709 Smith T                    147 E   Aug 24
   6361 Smith Thos                  47 C   Aug 21
   9499 Smith T R                    2 E  Sept 21
    139 Smith Wm                    99 H   Mar 24
    325 Smith Wm               Art   3 K April  2
    532 Smith Wm                   104 A April 14
    812 Smith Wm                   106 B April 30
   7550 Smith Wm                     2 L  Sept  2
  10164 Smith Wm                    76 K   Oct  1
  12394 Smith H                      7 C   Jan  5 65
   3708 Snedegar A J               111 D  July 21 64
   7173 Snyder A                    25 E   Aug 29
   4448 Snyder B                     2 B   Aug  1
  10076 Snyder Wm             Drag   1 E  Sept 30
   1319 Sombeck Geo                 52 I   May 23
   5169 Somers John                  2 E   Aug  9
   2773 Sopher James               132 F  July  2
   2403 Sopher S                   102 K  June 24
   4352 Sotter J M                  47 C  July 31
   3534 Southard H             Cav   5 C  July 18
  10526 Southard N                   2 H   Oct  8
  11346 Southard W A                18 I   Oct 23
   2877 Souther Henry               69 K  July  4
   8124 Southworth R           Cav  22 E  Sept  8
  10488 Skall S                Art   7 L   Oct  7
  12029 Skeeley T                   66 H   Nov 15
   9954 Spark G, S’t           Art  16 C  Sept 28
   6975 Sparks E                    10 B   Aug 27
   5421 Spaulding H            Cav   1 F   Aug 12
   5567 Spellman John               66 B   Aug 13
  12712 Spencer A                   93 D   Feb 28 65
  10989 Sperry A                    51 F   Oct 16 64
   3532 Span Jas                   147 H  July 18
   5982 Spanbury S             Art  14 C   Aug 17
   5821 Sprague E H            Bat  10 -   Aug 16
   3593 Sprague J                   85 I  July 19
  10730 Sprig Jas A            Cav  24 E   Oct 11
   4877 Sprink A                   146 F   Aug  6
   9035 Struts Jno                  15 A  Sept 17
    889 Stacey Jno                  99 I   May  4
   4574 Stadler J, S’t              39 A   Aug  2
  10078 Stancliff A B              106 H  Sept 30
   2570 Stanton H H                 22 E  June 27 64
   5187 Stark J D, Cor             100 A   Aug  9
  11740 Starkweather L             146 E   Nov  2
  12650 Star C                      15 D   Feb 13 65
   7381 Stanton L H            Art   7 K   Aug 31 64
   2520 Stark J H                  121 A  June 26
   1698 Stanley J C, Cor            85 C  June  7
  10290 St Dennis L                 16 F   Oct  4
   9903 Stewart Peter                5 B  Sept 27
   7636 Stevens E                  120 C  Sept  2
     95 Stevenson Wm               132 G   Mar 22
   3782 Sternhoff A            Art  15 C  July 22
   4678 Stevens Jno S              100 F   Aug  4
   5530 Steiner C              Art   7 M   Aug 13
   7028 Stevens Wm                  99 I   Aug 27
   2546 Stead J                    115 F  June 27
   6531 Stebins C                   85 C   Aug 23
   3872 Stevenson W                 10 F  July 24
   6443 Stead J                     15 D   Aug 22
   2034 Stewart Jno                 89 -  June 15
   1863 Stebbins H                  85 B  June 12
   6049 Stelrocht D            Cav  22 C   Aug 18
  10149 Stickler E                 169 A   Oct  1
  11755 Stivers R                  111 F   Nov  2
   7075 Still D                    132 D   Aug 28
   6102 Stump W                      6 K   Aug 18
   4193 Still Jas                  164 E  July 29
   4385 Stillwell S            Art   2 E  July 31
    915 Stone Jno, Mus         Cav   5 C   May 16
  11043 Stoddard J                 111 F   Oct 17
   6722 Stone L                     24 E   Aug 24
   2053 Stoup J                     15 A  June 16
   3415 Strue G A              Art   1 B  July 16
   3997 Storing A                   51 B  July 26
   8520 Strain A W             Cav   2 I  Sept 12
   3905 Streeter F                  76 F  July 24
   4665 Storms A N             Art   7 I   Aug  4
   4798 Strale J                   178 B   Aug  5
   5342 Strater Geo                 85 K   Aug 11
   6988 Stratton J H               140 H   Aug 27
  11967 Strip W, Cor                42 E   Nov 11
    116 Streight Lewis             127 A   Mar 23
   2401 Stratten Chas              125 K  June 24
   7845 Sturdevant G           Cav   5 I  Sept  4
   5994 Stutzman P                  39 D   Aug 17
   6102 Stump W                     60 K   Aug 18
  11832 Styler G W             Art   7 I   Nov  5
   9953 Sughem I               H A   - B  Sept 28
    640 Sullivan Ed                 69 A April 20
   6048 Sullivan M                  69 K   Aug 18
   1492 Sullivan Pat, Cor           99 H   May 31
   7728 Sullivan P C, Cor          155 E  Sept  3
   5440 Susear Fred                 39 I   Aug 12
  10661 Sutliff E, Cor         Cav  15 M   Oct 11
      1 Swarner J H            Cav   2 H   Feb 27
   4005 Swarner J, Bu.         Cav   2 H  July 26
   6466 Swartz M               Cav   2 M   Aug 22
  12267 Swager G                   103 F   Dec 12
   2322 Sweeney Jas                155 I  June 22
   5835 Sweeney M                  122 C   Aug 16
   3527 Sweet E                     93 F  July 18
   2921 Sweet L                Art   4 M  July  5
   4960 Sylurs S                   140 E   Aug  7
  12765 Swancent J                   2 A   Mar 13 65
  10559 Stratton E                  76 E   Oct 10 64
   1934 Taylor A               Cav   2 F  June 14
   4867 Taylor C                   115 F   Aug  6
    551 Taylor Chas B              154 - April 14 64
  11321 Taylor D                   149 D   Oct 22
   2742 Taylor R H                 125 F  July  1
    493 Taylor Thos B          Cav  10 E April 11
   9993 Taylor L B, Cor            147 K  Sept 29
  12290 Taylor W               Cav  12 A   Dec 15
  12480 Taylor W                    42 B   Jan 17 65
  10370 Taylor W H             Art   7 C   Oct  5 64
  10738 Taylor W H             Cav   7 C   Oct 11
  10157 Taylor Wm              Cav  22 C   Oct  1
   8961 Taylor W W, S’t              2 I  Sept 16
   8988 Tarvis G W            Drag   1 K  Sept 17
   9480 Tare W                     115 D  Sept 21
   3681 Tambrick A             Cav  16 A  July 21
   3976 Tanner M                     1 E  July 25
   4326 Tanschivit Ed          Art  15 E  July 30
   7019 Tell Wm                     59 C   Aug 27
   9143 Thompson A                   9 D  Sept 18
    133 Terry Aaron, S’t            12 K   Mar 24
   9064 Teneyck M              Art  14 E  Sept 17
   4909 Tewey J                     99 H   Aug  6
   6445 Terwilliger D R             85 D   Aug 22
  10352 Thomas J               Cav   2 D   Oct  5
   3598 Thomas H                    88 D  July 19
   3711 Thomas W, S’t                3 H  July 21
   4619 Thomas J                    85 G   Aug  3
  10361 Thearer J              Bat   1 -   Oct  5
   8161 Thompson C W                85 K  Sept  8
   4781 Thompson J                  39 H   Aug  5
   5510 Thompkins Ira          Art   6 -   Aug 13
   5524 Thompson P                  10 E   Aug 13
   6730 Thompson N B               146 A   Aug 24
   5784 Thompson J                 104 G   Aug 15
   2613 Thompson T             Cav  12 F  June 28
    320 Thompson Daniel            142 E April  2
   3538 Thresh G Cav                 5 K  July 18
   5147 Thurston N E                85 C   Aug  9
  11235 Thornton J             Art  14 L   Oct 21
   6309 Thorpe W C                  82 I   Aug 20
   4393 Thurston G W                85 E  July 31
  12843 Thayer G                    70 E April 22 65
    679 Thierbach P M               39 D April 22 64
  11230 Tilton H               Art  24 -   Oct 20
   8283 Tillitson N P               51 A  Sept  9
   8849 Timerson Wm            Art   2 I  Sept 15
   2680 Timmish ——                  85 C  June 30
    659 Tiner David                 79 E April 21
  10422 Townsend W                 111 B   Oct  6
   8068 Townsend L             Cav  22 G  Sept  7
   3883 Townsend Jno                52 A  July 24
    535 Townsend Geo M             111 F April 14
   9050 Thornson E                  22 -  Sept 17
   4774 Toney L                    100 D   Aug  5
  10727 Tolal Pat                  164 K   Oct 11
   5833 Towner L               Cav   5 G   Aug 16
   6047 Tobias A                   120 G   Aug 18
   2112 Toomey J F, Cor             85 I  June 17
  12465 Tourney P                   99 B   Jan 16 65
  12636 Tocdt H                      1 K   Feb 10
  12708 Tomlinson W F               22 G   Feb 28
   3193 Tripp Ira, S’t              77 B  July 12 64
  10442 Tripp O S              Art   3 K   Oct  7
   9507 Truman A M             Art   2 D  Sept 22
   7629 Trueman R              Art   7 G  Sept  2
   8544 Tremor M                    76 F  Sept 12
   7317 Trumpp E               Cav  22 F   Aug 30
   3882 Trumbull H                 115 I  July 24
   7187 Travis T               Cav   8 G   Aug 29 64
   4052 Truesdale W J               85 H  July 27
   3425 Trompter F, S’t            140 B  July 16
    100 Tracey Pat                  99 I   Mar 22
    707 Turner Wm, Cor         Cav   5 G April 24
   7970 Turner Jno                  49 A  Sept  5
  11376 Turner J               Cav  22 M   Oct 24
   1688 Turner Thos            Cav  16 B  June  6
   2120 Turner J B                  85 C  June 17
  10535 Tuthill C              Cav  22 G   Oct  8
   9687 Tuthill S D            Art   2 M  Sept 24
  10604 Tuft E                      29 C   Oct 10
   7915 Turden E S             Cav  15 D  Sept  5
   7421 Turton W F             Art   2 I   Aug 31
   3796 Tubbs W H                   85 D  July 22
   3084 Tupple H, S’t              154 H  July  9
   3129 Tucker L                   120 D  July 10
   2893 Tuttle W                    48 K  July  4
  10494 Tyrrell J              Cav  22 A   Oct  8
   4217 Uncer Jas                   15 H  July 29
    416 Uber Chas, S’t              14 A April  7
  12401 Udell J                Art   7 H   Jan  5 65
  10887 Ulmer H                Art  15 K   Oct 14 64
   2317 Underburg L W               77 G  June 22
    254 Underhill H                 47 E   Mar 30
   1495 Underwriter A               62 F   May 21
   1091 Van Clarke Wm              106 D   May 14
   9087 Van Allen C                  7 E  Sept 18
   1025 Van Buren J W          Art   3 K   May 11
    664 Van Buren H            Art   3 K April 21
  10071 Van Bethysen H         Art   7 I  Sept 30
  12539 Van Bramin T                71 K   Jan 27 65
   1511 Van Derbreck A             132 B  June  3 64
   3463 Van Dugen ——            C   24 M  July 17
   6560 Van Hosen C                 95 A   Aug 23
  10656 Van Housen B           Bat  12 -   Oct 11
   3371 Van Haughton J             124 C  July 15
   1418 Vanderbrogart W            104 F   May 27
   8957 Vanarsdale P                 1 G  Sept 16
   8782 Vanalstine H               152 A  Sept 14
   8806 Vanclack F                   5 D  Sept 15
   7564 Vanvelzer J M               85 I  Sept  2
   7635 Vanburen J             Cav  15 B  Sept  2
  11446 Vanscott L                  59 C   Oct 25
  11596 Vanarnum J             Cav   8 E   Oct 28
   7054 Vanwagner C            Art   2 F   Aug 28
   7244 Vanesse M              Cav   2 K   Aug 29
   7252 Vanzart Wm             Art   7 E   Aug 30
   6472 Varney C                   169 E   Aug 22
   6634 Vanalstine C           Art   7 C   Aug 23
   3333 Vanest J H             Art  14 B  July 15
     83 Vanvelsen J                120 A   Mch 21
   2089 Vaughan W H            Cav   8 K  June 17
    937 Vespers Jas W               85 D   May  9
   7506 Van Osten C                 52 H  Sept  1
   5661 Vencot L               Cav   2 H   Aug 14
   4196 Veil Wm                Art   6 F  July 29
   1539 Vernon S               Cav   2 M  June  1
   7846 Vincent R                  178 I  Sept  4
   2782 Vincent Richard              1 K  July  2
   2879 Vinsant G M            Art  14 I  July  4
   2715 Vish O                     178 E  July  1
   6525 Vibbard Geo            Cav  22 E   Aug 22
  10023 Voerling H             Art  15 C  Sept 29
   4623 Vogle Anton                 10 C   Aug  3
   5503 Voorhies A H           Cav   1 H   Aug 13
  11507 Voorhies E R                85 C   Oct 26
   6682 Voorhies Geo                85 C   Aug 23 64
   1184 Walls Peter            Cav   4 D   May 18
   5001 Wall Jas, S’t               15 G   Aug  7
   1398 Wallace Jno            Cav  11 B   May 26
  10211 Watt H                  “   12 A   Oct  2
   9977 Watts C                      6 C  Sept 28
  10313 Waters A L             Cav   8 F   Oct  4
  10477 Warner Chas L           “    2 D   Oct  7
   4026 Warren L                    95 I  July 26
   7351 Warner P P             Art  14 M   Aug 31
   7444 Warner A J                  76 F  Sept  1
  12449 Warner Luther          Cav  12 A   Jan  9 65
  10543 Ward Patrick                88 C   Oct  8 64
   5127 Ward J                      99 G   Aug  9
  10920 Ward J                      40 H   Oct 14
   2238 Ward H                      95 I  June 20
    400 Ward W A                    99 B April  6
  12816 Warden H B                   5 B   Mch 25 65
   9858 Walters D                  125 E  Sept 27 64
   1557 Walters Nelson             120 K  June  2
   3381 Walterhouse Ed               9 I  July 16
   2827 Wallace J              Cav   2 M  July  3
   8939 Watson G               Art   6 C  Sept 16
  10965 Watson Jas             Art  15 M   Oct 15
   6947 Watson T                    99 I   Aug 26
   9356 Wade M                 Art  14 D  Sept 20
   8146 Walker J               Art   2 D  Sept  8
   8198 Wall J                      64 I  Sept  8
   7276 Warhurst Sam’l         Art   7 I   Aug 30
   3731 Washington I                76 G  July 21
   5679 Washburn H             Cav   5 D   Aug 14
   2023 Wagner C                    39 E  June 15
  10686 Wagner C                    93 K   Oct 11
  11001 Warren P               Art   7 G   Oct 16
  16537 Warren E               Cav  22 L   Aug 23
   4120 Warren Geo R                 2 F  July 28
  11082 Warrell E C, S’t            57 I   Oct 17
  11945 Waterman S                 169 K   Nov 10
   6978 Waldron N                  146 A   Aug 27
   7249 Walz M                 Art  14 I   Aug 30
   6425 Walling Geo                 76 B   Aug 22
   6046 Watchler J, S’t            119 G   Aug 18
   4060 Wails C H                  109 K  July 27
   3336 Walser Jno             Art  15 D  July 15
   1564 Walcott G P                 67 D  June  2
   2294 Wales J, S’t                85 D  June 22
   1537 West Jas               Art   3 H  June  1
   9572 West T                 Cav  13 F  Sept 23
   3964 West Wm                    152 E  July 25
    739 West Jas, S’t          Cav   2 E   Apr 25
  10303 Weston L                   115 F   Oct  4
   9731 Webster G                   29 C  Sept 25
   5593 Webster E                   76 E   Aug 14
   1598 Webster James              137 C  June  4
   9889 Wendle John            Art   7 E  Sept 27
   9941 Wellstraff C               100 D  Sept 28
  10013 Welch W                     76 G  Sept 29
   5030 Welch C                Cav   3 B   Aug  8
   8555 Welber E G                 120 K  Sept 15
   8208 Weil E C                   164 B  Sept  8
   7561 Welson Jas H                74 K  Sept  2
   8177 Welch C                     39 H  Sept  8
   5181 Welch E                Bat  24 -   Aug  9
   6692 Welch J                Cav   5 K   Aug 24
   2310 Welsh L                    146 B  June 22
   8855 Welber E G                 120 K  Sept 15
   9428 Weaver J               Cav   1 E  Sept 21
   7078 Weaver B S                  96 I   Aug 28 64
   9448 Webber C H                  85 C  Sept 21
   9506 Westerfield P S        Art   7 B  Sept 22
   8731 Werting John                52 D  Sept 14
   7987 Wellington G R, S’t     C   12 A  Sept  6
   8204 Weeks J                      7 G  Sept  8
   7472 Wells Jeff                   1 H  Sept  1
  12036 Wells E                     69 K   Nov 16
   7667 Weismere H                  32 I  Sept  3
   4915 Wedder N C                 184 E   Aug  6
  11061 Wellder C M            Cav  22 G   Oct 17
  11397 Westbrook D                155 H   Oct 24
   6927 Weafer Chas                115 A   Aug 26
   7256 Wertz Jas              Cav  12 I   Aug 30
   6370 Webb M E               Art  14 F   Aug 21
  11127 Welch J                Cav   5 D   Oct 18
   6002 Weiber J               Art   6 E   Aug 17
   4272 Weller W H                  85 E  July 29
   3285 Westfall Jno               151 H  July 12
    265 Weldon Edson C              20 M   Mar 31
    507 Westhrop H                 125 B April 12
   6755 Webster H              Cav  22 A   Aug 24
  10303 Weston L                   115 F   Oct  4
   7543 Whitmore D                 140 I  Sept  2
  10423 Wharton J R            Cav   5 L   Oct  6
   9743 Whittle J C                 85 E  Sept 25
   9878 Whertmore M            Art  15 M  Sept 13
   8611 Whipple M              Cav  22 D  Sept 13
   8680 White Jas             Drag   1 D  Sept 13
  11879 White L                Art   8 G   Nov  6
   3034 White E                Cav  10 D  July  8
   8792 Whiting M                   85 D  Sept 15
   7417 Whitney John, S’t           39 K   Aug 31
   5207 Whitney J                  104 E   Aug 10
  10972 Whitman I                   16 H   Oct 15
  12049 Whitmans P                  66 E   Nov 16
  11724 Whifbeck J, Cor             20 D   Nov  1
   6611 Wheeler D                  147 H   Aug 23
   5770 Whitmore O B                40 A   Aug 15
   4155 Whitlock Wm            Art  14 I  July 28
   1133 Wilson James               132 K   May 16
   3757 Wilson John                 95 A  July 22
   6832 Wilson M               Art   2 H   Aug 25
  11983 Wilson W                   155 H   Nov 13
   5870 Wilson A                    57 A   Aug 16
   1645 Wilson D                    48 H  June  5
   6233 Windness A             Art  15 C   Aug 20
   4080 Williams F                 125 A  July 27
   4522 Williams Ed                 42 A   Aug  2
  11130 Williams H             Cav   2 M   Oct 18
  12697 Williams S                  94 I   Feb 23 65
   9516 Williams L D                85 G  Sept 22 64
   8478 Wilcox T E                  85 B  Sept 11
   7945 Williams Jas                63 G  Sept  5
   4603 Williams Geo, Cor      Cav   1 K   Aug  3
   4701 Williams John               52 K   Aug  4
   3947 Williams O, S’t        Bat  24 -  July 25
   1567 Williams H                   9 A  June  2
   6861 Williams L                  16 A   Aug 26
   7112 Williams I B           Cav  24 C   Aug 28
   6219 Williams C R                85 E   Aug 20
   3069 Wiron P                Cav  20 M  July  9
   3273 Wicks D                     63 D  July 13
   1938 Wilcox Geo             Cav  12 F  June 14
   2044 Wilcox R                    14 -  June 15
   9496 Wilcox W                    43 G  Sept 21
   3576 Wilcox J                    85 D  July 19
  11111 Wilcox H R                  55 C   Oct 18 64
  11428 Wilcox C, S’t          Cav   5 G   Oct 24
  12607 Wiley I                     59 B   Feb  7 65
  10122 Willis I                   121 G   Oct  1 64
   9057 Willsey D                    7 -  Sept 17
   8729 Wiggins James               52 D  Sept 14
   7980 Winn James             Art   7 I  Sept  6
   8208 Will E C                   164 B  Sept  8
   7622 Wiley W                    115 G  Sept  2
   3728 Wilkey S                     8 B  July 21
  10977 Wilkinson J N, Cor          42 A   Oct 15
   5663 Wicks Frank            Art   1 K   Aug 14
  11474 Winney G A                 100 D   Oct 25
  11520 Winter G               Cav  10 L   Oct 26
  11689 Wilds I                    154 B   Oct 31
   7122 Winser I                   117 I   Aug 28
   7581 Wood E G               Bat  24 -  Sept  2
   3607 Wood F                 Cav   5 I  July 19
   9874 Wood H                     115 G  Sept 27
  10063 Wood H                      15 B  Sept 30
   9715 Wood J                 Cav  10 H  Sept 25
   7686 Wood John                   97 D  Sept  3
   3881 Wood M                     111 H  July 24
   5039 Wood J S               Art   6 A   Aug  8
   9132 Woodmancy D M           C    3 H  Sept 18
  10141 Wood W J                    95 H   Oct  1
   8382 Woodworth B                 56 D  Sept 10
   7884 Woodland H                   1 I  Sept  5
   5696 Woodhull D T                 8 E   Aug 15
  12356 Wooley G C             Art   7 K   Dec 30
  11821 Wolf T                      88 D   Nov  5
  11031 Wolfe W                Art   2 H   Oct 16
   6130 Wolfe Fred, Cor        Cav  24 E   Aug 19
    591 Wolfran A                   52 C April 16
   4847 Wright Chas S              118 E   Aug  6
  10941 Wright D                    43 G   Oct 14
   5126 Wright I I                 148 I   Aug  9
   4281 Wang C                      39 E  July 30
   7784 Wulslager John              85 G  Sept  4
   4589 Wyatt James                147 G   Aug  2
   7334 Wyncoop G, S’t         Cav  12 H   Aug 30
   2104 Winegardener L              18 G  June 17
   7433 Yales W G                   71 H  Sept  1
   4984 Yencer I D             Bat  24 -   Aug  7
  12501 Yeomand G                    7 A   Jan 21 65
   6539 Young C                     41 D   Aug 23 64
   5598 Young Chas                  15 C   Aug 14
   8224 Young E                Art   2 I  Sept  8
   1306 Young Eugene               111 G   May 23
   8733 Young George                22 H  Sept 14
   6946 Young J, S’t           Cav   1 B   Aug 26
   7411 Young T B                  148 A   Aug 31
  10481 Yonker W               Art  10 B   Oct  7
   7480 Zaphan H P             Art   7 E  Sept  1
  12204 Zolber F W                  40 D   Dec  1
  12617 Zegler S                   145 G   Feb  9 65
    TOTAL 2571.


NORTH CAROLINA.

   1596 Barker J                     2 F  June  3 64
    849 Briggs Wilson                1 A   May  3
    275 Callowhill B                 2 F   Mar 31
    475 Cox William C, S’t           2 F   Apr  9
    864 Check W F, Cor               2 F   May  8
    144 Dunbar Alex                  2 F   Mar 22
   1057 Miller J, Drum               2 D   May 13
  10705 Macey Henry                  7 -   Oct 11 64
  11844 Moss Wm                      1 F   Nov  5
   8690 Norfield Warren              1 G  Sept 14
    370 Stone Jno A                  2 F   Apr  5
   2636 Smith Jas                    2 F  June 29
   4899 Smith George                 2 E   Aug  5
    333 Turner F                     2 I   Apr  2
    798 Turner H, Colored            2 I   Apr 29
    204 Weeks Nathan                 2 F   Mar 28
    712 Williams Thos                2 D   Apr 24
    TOTAL 17.


OHIO.

  12846 Akers J W                    4 B   Apr 24 65
    251 Arthur George                7 B   Mar 30 64
    789 Arrowsmith W R              45 K   Apr 28
   1118 Ames George                100 K   May 15
   1550 Allen W                     45 B  June  1
   1569 Alinger D                   51 C  June  2
   1724 Anderson D                 111 B  June  8
   1779 Augustus T                  89 K  June  9
   1805 Akers A A                   94 F  June 10
   2040 Aldridge C W                33 -  June 15
   2935 Adam Miller                103 I  July  5
   3046 Anderson R                  93 C  July  8
   3197 Aldbrook C W                60 -  July 12
   3485 Arthur J C, S’t             89 A  July 17
   3852 Armebrish A                 21 A  July 24
   3932 Almond A                    72 A  July 25
   4529 Arnold Chas            Cav   9 G   Aug  2
   4990 Ailes T G                   20 I   Aug  7
   5048 Andrews Sam’l G              - -   Aug  8
   6422 Adams E                Cav   2 C   Aug 22
   7429 Allen A B, Cor             121 C   Aug 31
   7482 Alward A                   135 B  Sept  1
   7436 Arthur J                    69 I  Sept  3
   7843 Arne I                      64 D  Sept  4
   9818 Alown A                     34 D  Sept 26
  10393 Andrews I R                 63 K   Oct  6
  10425 Adams I                    122 I   Oct  6
  10874 Allen James C               91 F   Oct 13
  11198 Andermill John              24 K   Oct 20
  12495 Allen J W, Cor               1 G   Jan 20 65
    188 Baiel W T, S’t              45 F   Mar 27 64
    207 Bodin Thomas S, S’t         44 -   Mar 28
    691 Beaver George E            111 B   Apr 23
    829 Beeman Richard             125 E   May  1
    861 Biddinger M, Mus            94 K   May  3
    952 Branigan James              82 F   May  8
   1094 Blangy S                    70 B   May 14
   1212 Botkins A S                 45 G   May 19
   1226 Black G W                   99 F   May 20
   1366 Bates L B              Cav   1 A   May 25
   1368 Bodkin W                    45 K   May 25
   1376 Baldwin N              Cav   9 T   May 26
   1385 Bowers James                89 A   May 26
   1468 Boyd H I                     7 H   May 30
   1602 Boman John                   2 C  June  4
   1609 Bryan R                     16 C  June  4
   1781 Balcomb D                   19 F  June  9
   1919 Brownles John                7 I  June 14
   1937 Brooks J                   135 I  June 14
   1970 Bothin W J                  45 F  June 15
   1993 Bartholomew E W            205 C  June 15
   2065 Belding F                  105 D  June 16
   2067 Brookheart W                45 I  June 16
   2087 Benor H                    100 E  June 17
   2110 Bishop S                    49 K  June 17 64
   2170 Berry J C                   90 E  June 19
   2264 Beers A                     45 A  June 20
   2292 Burnham W              Art   1 K  June 21
   2415 Bird I                      45 A  June 24
   2492 Bratt G, S’t                21 G  June 26
   2599 Broughfman I                39 C  June 28
   2696 Brandon John                15 F  June 30
   3053 Barnes V H                  92 H  July  9
   3245 Brown Charles               23 D  July 13
   3299 Burns M G                  111 B  July 13
   3608 Brackneck H            Cav   7 A  July 19
   3656 Bogart John                  9 G  July 20
   3706 Bontrell C                   6 G  July 21
   3756 Butch O                     45 I  July 22
   3831 Bowman S                    51 K  July 23
   4073 Brockway M             Art   2 D  July 27
   4279 Boyle W H                   11 H  July 30
   4684 Britton B H                125 H   Aug  4
   4968 Berdy M J                   45 D   Aug  7
   5138 Buckle J J                 126 E   Aug  9
   5219 Brabham Geo            Cav   9 B   Aug 10
   5498 Baldwin Geo             “    9 G   Aug 13
   5653 Bonestine W H, Cor         107 I   Aug 14
   5656 Burna J M                  121 K   Aug 14
   5758 Balmet J                    19 I   Aug 15
   5771 Brutch E               Cav  10 I   Aug 15
   5819 Bond S T                   123 B   Aug 16
   5825 Boyle H                    130 B   Aug 16
   5937 Bower F                     61 I   Aug 17
   5985 Birch L T                   31 H   Aug 17
   6008 Bowman A                   104 E   Aug 17
   6020 Bright N                     6 E  July 17
   6152 Brown G S                  111 F   Aug 18
   6839 Baren T J, Cor              89 A   Aug 25
   7280 Barrett S C                 26 F   Aug 30
   7283 Bell A                      70 B   Aug 30
   7484 Baxter P D                 121 D  Sept  1
   7490 Brenning C                  14 G  Sept  1
   7529 Brown W                     26 G  Sept  1
   7806 Bear E                      33 A  Sept  4
   7983 Bender C                    54 C  Sept  6
   7993 Brown M, Cor               110 F  Sept  6
   7994 Barnes T S                  31 B  Sept  6
   8365 Benear W A                 135 F  Sept 10
   8376 Barston G H                135 F  Sept 10
   8476 Brenner N                   60 F  Sept 11
   8496 Barnes A                    36 G  Sept 11
   8508 Blythe C                     1 I  Sept 12
   8509 Brinhomer J                 65 C  Sept 12
   8676 Brown H H                   41 A  Sept 13
   8693 Bell James                 135 B  Sept 14
   8872 Buckley J G                126 A  Sept 15
   8939 Blessing C                   9 F  Sept 16
   9287 Baker W C                   94 -  Sept 19
   9446 Brookover Geo              135 B  Sept 21
   9473 Briace J R                 122 C  Sept 21
   9625 Bradley A                  101 A  Sept 24
   9679 Blackman S                  72 G  Sept 24
   9897 Birchfield Eli              14 -  Sept 27
   9949 Beant H T                   34 D  Sept 28
  10120 Brewer D C                  43 K   Oct  1
  10199 Brown E N                   21 E   Oct  2
  10281 Brum W H, S’t               20 B   Oct  4
  10591 Briggs F                    17 G   Oct 10
  11072 Baymher L G                153 A   Oct 17
  11307 Boles G                    112 H   Oct 22
  11308 Bunker J                    11 K   Oct 22 64
  11313 Burns M                     12 K   Oct 22
  11626 Bricker J J, S’t           126 H   Oct 28
  11920 Bumgardner Joel              3 C   Nov  8
  11939 Barber B               Cav  10 D   Nov  9
  12296 Bissel J                     2 E   Dec 16
  12383 Beckley G                  102 F   Jan  3 65
  12524 Barnes E H                   2 D   Jan 26
  12641 Bower A                     37 F   Feb 12
    517 Blackwood I H               92 I   Apr 12 64
  12772 Bowens W                   100 A   Mar 13 65
      5 Carpenter W, Cor            92 D   Mar  4 64
    458 Copeland C                   1 A   Apr  9
    561 Coates Geo             Cav   7 I   Apr 15
    563 Campbell Jas            “    7 H   Apr 15
    723 Callaway Wm             “    7 F   Apr 25
    763 Coleman G                  101 A   Apr 27
    911 Chapman G                   75 A   May  1
    928 Crosser M                  111 B   May  7
    965 Corby W C                  111 B   May  8
   1269 Cruat Wm                    89 C   May 21
   1291 Collins Thos, Cor           21 G   May 22
   1521 Capeheart H                 70 I   May 31
   1587 Clark H S                   62 E  June  3
   1631 Conklin W                  121 B  June  5
   1679 Clark D V                  111 B  June  6
   1900 Childers Wm                 89 B  June 13
   1945 Crocker Geo            Art   1 A  June 14
   1992 Christy W                   89 K  June 15
   2017 Curtis N                    45 D  June 15
   2025 Careahan G M                65 F  June 15
   2101 Caldwell J, S’t             15 D  June 17
   2162 Cornelius L C, Cor          89 C  June 19
   2207 Cochrane James, S’t         22 G  June 20
   2468 Church E                     2 G  June 25
   2578 Combston J             Cav   7 I  June 27
   2963 Cameron H                   69 B  July  6
   3002 Callahan H                  34 C  July  7
   3241 Caynee Geo M                89 D  July 13
   3307 Canard J Q A                14 G  July 13
   3356 Cruer J W                   60 B  July 15
   3541 Cole B                      82 A  July 18
   3578 Collins T                   15 I  July 19
   3604 Cook L B               Cav   2 C  July 19
   3617 Clark J C, S’t              31 H  July 20
   3774 Clayton D J            Cav   9 D  July 22
   3937 Cover L                     49 B  July 25
   4128 Clayton J                   89 G  July 28
   4342 Conway J                   103 A  July 30
   4493 Cordray J J                 89 G   Aug  1
   4865 Cahill J N                  90 C   Aug  6
   5105 Charles F                   10 A   Aug  9
   5451 Collyer J                   11 G   Aug 12
   5548 Chandler M                 124 E   Aug 13
   5922 Clark James                 89 I   Aug 17
   6022 Cline K                    111 B   Aug 17
   6108 Church Geo E, S’t           14 C   Aug 18
   6188 Chambers R S                89 A   Aug 19
   6258 Copir S A, Cor              33 C   Aug 20
   6281 Conklin J R                 45 I   Aug 20
   6562 Craig D, S’t                 2 D   Aug 23
   7483 Caswell G                   21 C  Sept  1
   7486 Coons David                 57 C  Sept  1
   7495 Crooks J M                  92 K  Sept  1
   7695 Chard C W                    2 H  Sept  3
   7800 Cregg J, S’t                49 K  Sept  4
   7835 Cline M                      2 E  Sept  4
   7919 Clark George                60 D  Sept  5 64
   7998 Clokir J W, S Maj           49 -  Sept  6
   8430 Cummings W S                35 I  Sept  8
   8454 Cattlehock T                35 A  Sept 14
   8457 Campbell W C                 5 I  Sept 11
   8694 Chapin Jas                 135 F  Sept 14
   8701 Crooke W B                 135 B  Sept 14
   8810 Clarke J R                 135 F  Sept 15
   9243 Corstein W, Cor             98 C  Sept 19
   9288 Cramblet A J               123 H  Sept 19
   9452 Campbell Sam’l              74 G  Sept 21
   9476 Cadwell A T                  3 E  Sept 21
   9491 Clay O                     122 D  Sept 21
   9662 Cort W                      11 D  Sept 24
   9770 Cummings A             Cav   6 E  Sept 25
   9772 Clark S                     24 H  Sept 26
   9895 Conner J B             Cav   9 G  Sept 27
   9971 Castable I                  51 A  Sept 28
  10381 Cotes Rufus            Cav   2 -   Oct  5
  10796 Colts R E                    2 C   Oct 12
  10834 Cepp J                      14 I   Oct 13
  10968 Cary A                      21 E   Oct 16
  11103 Carter J B                  89 I   Oct 18
  11224 Craven A J, Cor             15 C   Oct 20
  11262 Cromwell W H                59 H   Oct 21
  11403 Cutsdaghner W J             95 D   Oct 24
  11540 Crominberger J C            23 I   Oct 27
  11567 Cantwright L                51 F   Oct 27
  11587 Chapin J A                 135 F   Oct 28
  11618 Clark H M                   21 A   Oct 28
  11641 Clingan A P                 26 K   Oct 30
  11766 Cohven J H                   6 K   Nov  3
  12082 Cahill Wm                   51 A   Nov 18
  12385 Calvington R                72 C   Jan  3 65
  12435 Chambers J C                15 C   Jan 11
  12691 Crampton A                  79 C   Feb 22
  12798 Conover S                  175 B   Mar 19
    690 Davis Wm E                   7 H   Apr 23 64
    930 Downing George              45 C   May  7
    981 Dumar R, S’t                45 D   May  9
   1267 Dugan Thos             Cav   1 B   May 21
   1748 Davis I, S’t                 7 T  June  9
   2251 Decker B F                 111 B  June 21
   2296 Dumas J P                    2 H  June 21
   2351 Douglass W                  24 F  June 23
   2674 Davis B                     22 B  June 30
   2909 Davis G H                   45 E  July  5
   2973 Dandelion T          Ind C   3 -  July  7
   3703 Dodson L               Cav   7 H  July 21
   3802 Dille Chas                  23 I  July 22
   4455 Dodge ——                     2 I   Aug  1
   4501 Diecy C                     26 C   Aug  1
   4772 Denton John            Cav   7 E   Aug  5
   5020 Desselbem M                  1 I   Aug  8
   5268 Dorson L, Cor               12 I   Aug 10
   5299 Doty E E                    41 H   Aug 11
   5368 Dyke F                 Cav   5 K   Aug 11
   5465 Donley James            “    1 F   Aug 13
   5620 Davis W H                   33 D   Aug 14
   6043 Decker J                   111 B   Aug 18
   6223 Durant B                    95 D   Aug 20
   6312 Downer A P                  52 B   Aug 20
   6708 Dougherty W H               15 H   Aug 24
   7229 Dildine J                   33 K   Aug 29
   7376 Deming W, Cor              111 B   Aug 31
   7419 Daley S                     33 D   Aug 31
   7427 Dick Chas, S’t              53 G   Aug 31
   7479 Drake M                     59 D  Sept  1 64
   7500 Doran James                 60 A  Sept  1
   7609 Ditto John                  51 A  Sept  2
   7631 DeMastoris J                54 B  Sept  2
   8034 Davison P S                 21 K  Sept  6
   8483 Donley M                    59 G  Sept 11
   8498 Drake J F                  135 C  Sept 11
   8779 Diver J                      4 -  Sept 14
   8820 Davere J                    49 D  Sept 15
   9293 Diver J                    123 H  Sept 19
   9605 Decker S                    12 C  Sept 23
   9702 Dobson J R                  99 H  Sept 25
   9849 Duffy G                     45 C  Sept 27
  10112 Dunbar J                   122 F   Oct  1
  10113 Diven J                    135 F   Oct  1
  10130 Duncan A                    49 K   Oct  1
  10190 Dunhand Jas            Cav   8 H   Oct  1
  10424 Dewit Joseph                65 G   Oct  6
  10596 Dibble F                   101 H   Oct 10
  11017 Diper O                    128 I   Oct 16
  11102 Danton W H                 105 E   Oct 18
  12159 Donahue P                   72 K   Oct 25
  12224 Drith C                     33 K   Dec  4
  12675 Dunken T                    20 K   Feb 19 65
  12738 Deputy W                    21 H   Feb  6
   7431 Davis G W, Cor              21 G   Aug 31 64
   1629 DeRush Sam’l                94 F  June  5
    327 Elijah Baker                45 B   Apr  2
    341 Evalt E J                   10 M   Apr 12
   1047 Eppart Samuel                9 B   May 12
   2221 Earles Wm              Cav   4 G  June 20
   3376 Ellis Chas                  29 B  July 16
   4504 Elliott W, Cor              20 F   Aug  1
   5304 Evans Sam’l                 33 C   Aug 11
   5349 Eastman J                   18 C   Aug 11
   5717 Evans Chas             Art   1 D   Aug 15
   5887 Ensly William              135 T   Aug 16
   6015 Eckhart J                    2 B   Aug 17
   7438 Elmann A                    28 F  Sept  1
   8981 Entulin B C                104 K  Sept 17
  11051 Evans W                     51 I   Oct 17
  11169 Evans E M, S’t              20 I   Oct 19
  11542 Elha D                       8 A   Oct 25
  11654 Ewing D                    135 D   Oct 30
  12321 Ellerman N                  59 K   Dec 22
     75 Falman A                    82 H   Mar 20
    176 Fairbanks Alph              45 A   Mar 26
    246 Ferris Joseph          Cav   2 H   Mar 30
    311 Foster A M                 100 A   Apr  2
    572 Frayer Daniel               99 I   Apr  5
    636 Facer Wm                   111 K   Apr 20
    830 Fisher Chas            Cav   3 C   May  1
   1054 Free M                 Bat  22 -   May 13
   1381 Freenough Geo           C    3 -   May 26
   1786 Frasier James, S’t           2 E  June 10
   2457 Fry W L                    123 H  June 25
   2479 Fenton J M, S’t             35 I  June 25
   2761 Finlan Jas                  18 K  July  2
   4231 Fry Jacob                   99 I  July 29
   4317 Fitch E P                   40 G  July 30
   4337 Fulkinson H                  2 I  July 30
   4651 Fife J                      33 E   Aug  3
   4868 Fling T I                   27 A   Aug  6
   5249 Ferce R S                    2 C   Aug 10
   5626 Falk W                      82 D   Aug 14
   5864 Fullerston W, Cor           18 K   Aug 16
   6212 Foreman A                   64 E   Aug 19
   6308 Fisher D                    89 I   Aug 20 64
   6891 Futers John H               82 F   Aug 26
   7873 Franks R L                 122 E  Sept  5
   7976 Forney W O                 123 D  Sept  6
   9158 Firman V               Cav   - -  Sept 18
   9225 Ferguson H              “    3 D  Sept 19
   9530 Fowler C                   100 A  Sept 22
   9557 Finch C                      - B  Sept 23
   9976 Franklinburg C              72 G  Sept 28
  10045 Farshay A                  116 F  Sept 29
  10915 Freely P                    10 G  Sept 14
  11819 Flowers W T                116 D   Nov  5
  11914 Forest Wm                   21 K   Nov  8
  12108 Fargrove M B               135 F   Nov 21
  12637 Fusselman J                 20 H   Feb 11 65
  12781 Foults M                   183 D   Mar 15
  12427 Fike W P                    95 H   Jan  9
    197 Griling Daniel              13 A   Mar 27 64
    245 Gardner A                  100 H   Mar 30
    386 Grescanst S, Cor       Cav   6 G   Apr  2
    611 Gillinghar B            “    7 I   Apr 18
    681 Godfrey Amos                45 C   Apr 23
    693 Greek Samuel               100 C   Apr 23
    906 Gibson Collins              40 H   May  5
   1465 Greer R J              Cav   6 C   May 29
   2452 Gillanni J                  35 K  June 27
   2926 Garner C               Cav   1 K  July  5
   3130 Goff P E                    19 K  July 10
   3251 Gaunt Wm, Cor               14 I  July 13
   3327 Gibson R                    40 B  July 15
   3962 Ginging P S, Cor            21 E  July 25
   4037 Gillett G W                  6 G  July 26
   4242 Gilbert J                   19 B  July 29
   4301 Grafton D                  118 D  July 30
   4383 Graham J W                  31 C  July 31
   4445 Goffy P                    113 G   Aug  1
   4655 Gragrer H                  125 H   Aug  3
   4802 Greer G G                   49 D   Aug  5
   4902 Granbaugh                   85 E   Aug  6
   6023 Gordon Wm                   45 B   Aug 17
   6075 Gallagher James             30 F   Aug 18
   6207 Green E                Cav   4 D   Aug 19
   6346 Gordon W                    10 G   Aug 21
   6408 Greff A J                   13 E   Aug 22
   6486 Gates H                     13 G   Aug 22
   6821 Grooves L                   12 C   Aug 25
   7111 Gilland A                   27 F   Aug 28
   8330 Goodrich J S                 9 A  Sept 10
   8367 Ganold L                    60 A  Sept 10
   9566 Gould J M                  124 A  Sept 23
   9813 Graft P                Bat  20 -  Sept 26
   9927 Galbraith J S, S’t     Cav   6 H  Sept 28
  11218 Gaither J                   60 B   Oct 20
  11850 Gardner G                    1 K   Nov  5
  12033 Glissin A, S’t         Cav   2 M   Nov 15
  12064 Gillinbuck I                77 E   Nov 17
  12109 Goodbrath C                 28 G   Nov 21
  12560 Griffith J H                58 C   Jan 31 65
  12842 Gassler P                   64 A   Apr 22
     35 Hall J W                     4 A   Mar  9 64
    295 Hochenburg N                45 C   Apr  1
    420 Hanney W T                  45 A   Apr  7
    424 Hill J, S’t            Cav   7 I   Apr  7
    437 Henry Jas               “    7 I   Apr  8
    464 Haner Jacob                 45 B   Apr  9
    527 Hickcox M R            Cav   2 B   Apr 13
    580 Holdman F              Bat   1 D   Apr 16
    748 Hanning Mark           Cav   7 I   Apr 26 64
    758 Harvey Chas                 76 E   Apr 26
    875 Henry G W                   95 E   May  4
    949 Hawkins W W, Cor           103 G   May  3
   1129 Hudsonpilfer R L        C    7 I   May 15
   1354 Hind George                103 H   May 25
   1390 Holloway G W                 1 C   May 28
   1524 Harrison J                  21 I   May 31
   1666 Hazlett Wm                   2 K  June  6
   1822 Hull S, S’t                 21 E  June 10
   1979 Harris E D, S’t             99 I  June 15
   2029 Hengle John            Cav   1 C  June 15
   2185 Humphreys W                 45 C  June 19
   2263 Hanley C                    15 F  June 20
   2300 Henderson S W, S’t          40 H  June 22
   2369 Howard J, Mus               70 D  June 23
   2424 Hayford A E                125 C  June 24
   2997 Harrington S J             103 I  June 28
   2671 Hurles I                   126 C  June 30
   2775 Hurlburt O                  14 H  July  2
   2842 Hadison J, Cor             111 B  July  3
   3185 Hall T                       2 H  July 11
     31 Heaton Amos                 45 T   Apr 20
   3388 Hudsen Wm                   74 G  July 16
   3420 Hunt W H                   113 G  July 16
   3736 Harman L                     9 F  July 21
   4030 Hansbury E A                 6 G  July 26
   4408 Hindershot John             45 D  July 31
   4411 Harris J                     1 E  July 31
   4506 Hartman H                   73 K   Aug  1
   4599 Harrison J M               105 H   Aug  3
   4993 Hendrickson O               19 F   Aug  7
   5293 Holibaugh J A               23 E   Aug 11
   5296 Hatfield G W               126 K   Aug 11
   5396 Holman A                    68 K   Aug 12
   5554 Honnihill T R                9 G   Aug 13
   5636 Hany B T                    89 C   Aug 14
   5813 Hicks F                     40 H   Aug 16
   5853 Hibbett Wm                  21 D   Aug 19
   5858 Hoit P                     116 B   Aug 16
   6058 Hamm E J, Cor                - K   Aug 18
   6123 Higgins I W, S’t            14 C   Aug 18
   6774 Houser W R                  89 K   Aug 18
   6522 Hicks I                     11 D   Aug 23
   6625 Hughes Henry                33 A   Aug 23
   6639 Henricks E                  34 H   Aug 23
   6647 Hartman I                    2 K   Aug 23
   6793 Herrig N               Cav   7 D   Aug 25
   6802 Hine T E                “    2 D   Aug 25
   7022 Hull O                      89 B   Aug 27
   7388 Hubbell W A                 23 A   Aug 31
   7446 Hurdnell O                  72 C  Sept  1
   7825 Holley V H, S’t            100 B  Sept  4
   7946 Hughes I                    12 E  Sept  5
   8060 Herbolt Dan’l              115 T  Sept  7
   8067 Harper I H                  60 I  Sept  7
   8284 Halshult A                  12 C  Sept  9
   8481 Hechler John                36 G  Sept 11
   8696 Hitchcock G                 34 G  Sept 14
   8725 Hifner G                    86 C  Sept 14
   9189 Hoyt R                       7 K  Sept 18
   9210 Hart E                      10 H  Sept 19
   9538 Hall S                     126 F  Sept 20
   9415 Hood F                      13 F  Sept 21
   9510 Hamilton J                  13 A  Sept 22
   9582 Hoover J                    18 K  Sept 23
   9622 Hurley J C                 124 C  Sept 23
  10094 Holmes Wesley              135 F  Sept 30 64
  10207 Harrison J             Cav   2 A   Oct  2
  10208 Holcomb L                    7 I   Oct  2
  10225 Harkins M                   60 D   Oct  2
  10390 Hinton Wm                   72 A   Oct  5
  10492 Hererlin B                  32 -   Oct  7
  10518 Herbert Wm                   4 I   Oct  8
  10524 Homich C                   110 D   Oct  8
  10647 Herman R                   135 F   Oct 11
  11029 Hilyard J                   98 F   Oct 16
  11032 Hubber D                     5 A   Oct 16
  11053 Heymers B                    2 G   Oct 17
  11209 Hanard J B                 123 C   Oct 20
  11288 Hoyt W B                    29 A   Oct 20
  11335 Henderson D                122 H   Oct 23
  11588 Hintz D                      1 B   Oct 28
  11592 Hutchins G W               135 A   Oct 28
  11696 Hutchins I W               153 A   Oct 31
  11856 Hayner B                   135 A   Nov  6
  11938 Hatfield A G               114 E   Nov  9
  12353 Hume J A, Cor               32 F   Dec 29
  12371 Haines N S, Cor             72 E   Jan  1 65
  12404 Hill W L                    54 A   Jan  6
  12446 Hill E P                    89 G   Jan 13
  12512 Hagerman R                  33 B   Jan 23
  12569 Hart H C                     2 C   Feb  1
  12611 Hagerly D G                 72 E   Feb  7
  12743 Holtz W                    101 I   Mar  7
   1129 Hudson R L, Cor        Cav   7 I   May 15 64
   1132 Hank George B                7 I   May 16
   2607 Hander L C                  92 E  June 28
   1280 Irving Ester               114 H   May 22
   1967 Ingler Wm                   31 C  June 14
   7489 Imboden J                   44 E  Sept  1
   8744 Irwin A                      1 I  Sept 14
  10700 Idold A, S’t           Cav   7 C   Oct 11
  12579 Isham D                     89 G   Feb  3 65
    354 Justice G W                 45 B   Apr  2 64
   1637 Johnson J H                 98 D  June  5
   3590 Jacobs P O                  45 E  July 19
   3754 Jones R                     45 C  July 22
   3903 Jones S                    111 B  July 24
   4381 Jewell I                    99 F  July 31
   5120 Johnston J W                89 H   Aug  9
   5508 Johnson M                  126 C   Aug 13
   5583 Jones H                     40 G   Aug 14
   5624 Jewell W A                 126 G   Aug 14
   5839 Jolly G                     21 K   Aug 16
   6265 Jeffries H                  36 I   Aug 20
   6810 Jones John, Cor             40 G   Aug 25
   7308 Johnson E                  124 I   Aug 30
   7861 Jones R W                  118 F  Sept  5
   8647 Jenkins Wm             Bat   3 -  Sept 13
   8757 Johnson D                   43 B  Sept 14
   8760 Johnson I                   51 A  Sept 14
   9306 Jordan A                   103 G  Sept 20
   9700 Jones I B                    3 M  Sept 25
   9744 Johnson I B                  2 C  Sept 25
   9850 Jones Wm, Cor               84 B  Sept 27
  11014 Jones S D                  135 F   Oct 16
  11203 Jennings Jno, Cor           24 K   Oct 20
  11942 Jones G L                  105 G   Nov  9
  12126 Jarvitt W                   15 A   Nov 22
  12231 Johnson A S, S’t            45 I   Dec  6
  12335 Jones W H                    2 C   Dec 26
  12428 Jackson S                   72 E   Jan 10 65
   7947 Jacobs H, Cor               26 F  Sept  6 64
    836 Kelley Josiah               45 C   May  1 64
   4615 Kimble S                    98 A   Aug  1
   4715 Knight J                    21 E   Aug  4
   5381 Kelly E                     21 D   Aug 12
   5448 Knidler J W                 33 H   Aug 12
   5576 Kelly H                      1 I   Aug 14
   6195 Kelsey Jno, Cor              3 I   Aug 19
   7177 Kennedy S J B               45 E   Aug 29
   7424 Kelly G                     15 E   Oct 31
   9377 Kelly Wm                    46 C  Sept 20
   9436 Kerr J H                   122 C  Sept 21
   9680 Knapp J                     54 E  Sept 24
  10139 Killar J                    15 D   Oct  1
  10607 Kirby A                Cav   4 A   Oct 10
  10853 Keanshoff L                 28 I   Oct 13
  11055 Kerr A                      13 I   Oct 17
  11732 Kingkade S                  18 C   Nov  2
  12661 Kennedy J                   70 K   Jan 16 65
  12746 Kaler J                     72 B   Mar  8
  12802 Karch J                    183 B   Mar 20
    765 Kinney Jno, Cor             67 E   Apr 27 64
   2406 Knowlton E             Cav   6 B  June 24
     13 Kiger J H, Cor              45 E   Apr  9
    834 Lowry Jas                   49 I   May  1
    935 Lewis Frank                103 D   May  7
   1286 Larme Chas                  45 K   May 22
   1364 Larkin Jos             Art   1 -   May 25
   1470 Logan Frank                 89 F   May 30
   1615 Logan H                Cav   6 E  June  4
   1828 Leonard Jno                 21 A  June 11
   2173 Lever H B                    2 C  June 19
   2372 Lisure Samuel                7 A  June 23
   2426 Lemons M                    89 E  June 24
   3495 Lutz M, Cor                 14 C  July 18
   3497 Love John                   96 E  July 18
   3649 Linsay J                    21 D  July 20
   4097 Lyon L L               Art   1 E  July 27
   4354 Law S S                    124 I  July 31
   4262 Lawson J, Cor                2 E  July 29
   4641 Lucas J                     89 H   Aug  3
   4628 Legrand D                  111 B   Aug  3
   4692 Long John                   45 H   Aug  4
   5195 Lightfoot Wm, Cor      Cav   9 G   Aug 10
   5246 Latta W H                   89 H   Aug 10
   5449 Lehigh W                    22 B   Aug 12
   5665 Lamphare G W               125 K   Aug 14
   5676 Larison A                   63 D   Aug 14
   6066 Lowe G H                    72 C   Aug 18
   6344 Leasure Isaac              122 K   Aug 21
   7123 Leasure F                   45 K   Aug 28
   7744 Linway J                     2 H  Sept  3
   8016 Lambert Jas                 89 A  Sept  6
   8739 Lickliter Henry            135 B  Sept 14
   8874 Lindsley A K                99 K  Sept 16
   9336 Leonard T M                 12 H  Sept 20
   9358 Lovely John                100 K  Sept 20
   9361 Lawyer J B                  89 L  Sept 20
   9419 Lefarer W E, Cit    Gard’r   - -     —    Athens Co
  10039 Laley ——                    28 -  Sept 29 64
  11161 Lepe A                       7 K   Oct 19
  11196 Lantz A W                   45 A   Oct 20
  11344 Lochner M                   72 E   Oct 23
  11440 Laughlin M W                 1 I   Oct 24
  11490 Lips F, Cor                  2 H   Oct 26
  11816 Lane D                      91 D   Nov  4
  12007 Lay John                   123 K   Nov 19
  12201 Lohmeyer H                  35 K   Nov 30
  12297 Livingood C B, Cor          35 G   Dec 16 64
  12525 Longstreet W F              31 A   Jan 26 65
  12698 Lewis D                      7 A   Jan 23
  12826 Little Wm                  175 D   Apr  7
     66 Metcalf Milo R             100 E   Mar 19 64
     96 Malsbray Asa           Cav  40 A   Mar 22
    113 Moore T J, S’t               2 D   Mar 23
    141 McKeever Jas                 8 G   Mar 24
    165 Mickey Samuel               45 E   Mar 26
    215 Murphy Jno             Cav   7 B   Mar 28
    412 Mitchell J                 120 F   Apr  7
    444 McKindry M                   7 I   Apr  9
    575 Malone R J, S’t             40 H   Apr 16
    880 McCormick J W E             33 B   May  4
    984 Musser D                    45 B   May  9
    998 Meek David                 111 K   May 10
   1262 McKnight H                  11 G   May 21
   1283 McMunny Geo, S’t            21 G   May 22
   1630 Moore Chas                  19 H  June  5
   1849 Masters Samuel              17 I  June 11
   1930 Martin G                   105 F  June 14
   2075 McCling B              Cav   7 I  June 17
   2139 Maloney A                    4 H  June 18
   2150 Mitchell W H                31 D  June 18
   2290 Massey J C                  33 A  June 21
   2471 Mullin J                    65 K  June 25
   2667 McCloud A                   35 G  June 29
   2682 Miller T               Cav   4 A  June 30
   2743 McFarland L                  2 I  July  1
   2806 McInnes A                   45 B  July  3
   2873 Moriatt Joseph               5 K  July  4
   2991 Mitchell Jas                17 D  July  7
   3104 Malone L B             Cav   7 L  July 10
   3122 Mitchell C                   1 K  July 10
   3137 Minchell R                  45 C  July 10
   3290 Mahin B                     51 I  July 13
   3491 Master J                    13 A  July 17
   3718 Miller E                     4 E  July 21
   4040 Marshall T, Cor             21 G  July 26
   4199 Myer C                      21 I  July 29
   4252 Meek J                      19 E  July 29
   4298 McKell M J, S’t             89 D  July 30
   4361 Mooney Jas                  50 D  July 31
   4421 Morris C E                  11 H  July 31
   4501 McCann A                    33 C   Aug  3
   4657 Maher P                      7 E   Aug  3
   4789 Martin D               Cav   3 L   Aug  5
   5738 McCabe H                    12 C   Aug 15
   5777 Manson W                     9 G   Aug 15
   5888 McIntosh D                  50 D   Aug 16
   6026 Manahan Thos                21 D   Aug 18
   6040 McKee Jas                   51 A   Aug 18
   6055 McHugh W S                   2 D   Aug 18
   6063 McClair P M                 27 A   Aug 18
   6478 McCabe J                    66 C   Aug 22
   6841 McCormick W P                2 G   Aug 25
   6855 McSorley D                  49 F   Aug 26
   6862 McCoy J B                   98 A   Aug 26
   6920 McDell Wm                   89 K   Aug 26
   7108 McDonald J                  99 H   Aug 28
   7133 Mason J                     45 D   Aug 28
   7136 More Jno H                  60 D   Aug 28
   7515 Myers L H                  135 B  Sept  1
   7896 Morris J                   105 A  Sept  5
   8021 Meek Robert                111 K  Sept  6
   8044 Myers A                     51 I  Sept  6
   8385 Maymer R                    68 D  Sept 10
   8408 McCabe J                    70 C  Sept 11 64
   8482 Morens H                    51 A  Sept 11
   8688 Moore T H                   59 C  Sept 13
   8726 Miller Samuel              135 F  Sept 14
   8838 Mackrill R                  50 I  Sept 15
   8885 Manlig S                    60 A  Sept 16
   9039 Miller C                    28 I  Sept 17
   9096 McMillan J F               123 A  Sept 18
   9241 McComb J S                  14 K  Sept 19
   9348 Maxwell P                   12 A  Sept 20
   8236 Moor D D                     2 A  Sept  9
   9659 Manly J                      7 M  Sept 24
   9867 Mitchell R C           Cav  10 -  Sept 27
  10064 Morgan R O              “   12 H  Sept 30
  10081 McIntosh Wm, S’t            23 I  Sept 30
  10106 Morais Wm                  135 F  Sept 30
  10517 Montgomery J                 2 G   Oct  8
  10563 Myer L, Blacksmith           1 A   Oct  9
  10936 Martin F               Cav  10 A   Oct 14
  11156 McElroy Jno                 92 B   Oct 18
  11200 Martin W                    15 A   Oct 20
  11341 McQuilken F                  1 I   Oct 23
  11400 Mark J                     135 B   Oct 24
  11811 Miller J                   135 I   Nov  4
  12050 Moore R F                  101 C   Nov 16
  12054 Mills G W                   60 F   Nov 16
  12184 Morrison J H                21 H   Nov 28
  12535 McDonald H H, Cit            - -   Jan 27 65
  12717 Milholland R               183 B   Mar  1
  12872 McGrath D, Cor             115 G   Mar 15
  12875 Martin M, Cor              135 B   Mar 16
    983 Neal Jno                    45 C   May  9 64
   2328 Nash C D                    45 B   May 22
   4994 Nelson J               Cav   1 K   Aug  7
   5897 Neff B                      95 H   Aug 16
   7103 Nelson Thos            Cav   1 -   Aug 28
  10584 Nelder S                    89 G   Oct 10
  11012 Nott J                     153 H   Oct 16
  11448 Norman G L                 135 B   Oct 25
  12815 Norris E J                 102 K   Mar 25 65
   2183 Niver Edward           Cav   3 I  June 19 64
   2245 Ostrander E W              100 A  June 20
   2442 Ott C                       51 C  June 25
   4552 O’Neil Jas                 126 F   Aug  2
  12024 O’Connor F                 103 F   Nov 15
  12247 Oliver J                   122 C   Dec  8
  12429 Olinger J                   63 F   Dec 10
  12835 Ornig J B                  101 I   Apr 17 65
  11349 O’Brien Jno                  2 D   Oct 23 64
     65 Pusey Jas                   45 H   Mar 19
    724 Parker Wm E                 45 H   Apr 25
    913 Penny A, Cor                59 C   May  6
   1326 Prouty Wm              Cav   9 L   May 24
   2692 Phenix A H                  21 H  June 20
      9 Price Barney                45 I   Apr  5
   3391 Pile Wilson, Cor            33 F  July 16
   3555 Pierce H                   100 A  July 18
   4020 Perkins W B                 89 G  July 26
   5190 Piffer G                   123 A   Aug  9
   5377 Parker W, Cor              124 H   Aug 11
   5426 Perrin N                    72 A   Aug 12
   6463 Parlice Geo W               94 -   Aug 22
   6589 Potter H                    72 E   Aug 23
   6690 Pullen Sam’l                33 B   Aug 24
   6717 Post J                 Art   1 D   Aug 24
   6984 Palmer Sam’l               135 I   Aug 27
   7021 Pease G E              Cav  10 I   Aug 27
   7157 Plunket M, Cor             124 E   Aug 29 64
   7329 Pelterson F                113 G   Aug 30
   7368 Purcell Jno                 72 D   Aug 31
   7384 Pierson J                  125 B   Aug 31
   7399 Palmer F G             Cav   2 D   Aug 31
   7519 Patten W                    21 D  Sept  1
   7644 Pierce Wm                   75 H  Sept  3
   7701 Pruser H                     1 B  Sept  3
   7724 Payne J                     89 E  Sept  3
   8109 Potts Jas                  122 E  Sept  7
   8288 Phillips H                  33 I  Sept  9
   8534 Powell F                     9 G  Sept 12
   8597 Pror A M, S’t          Cav 135 B  Sept 12
   8620 Pinert F                    21 C  Sept 13
   8753 Parker Z                   124 E  Sept 14
   9111 Parks J W              Cav   6 G  Sept 18
   9327 Parker J                    40 H  Sept 20
   9470 Perrin G                     3 B  Sept 21
   9768 Pipenbring Geo              13 K  Sept 25
   9822 Preston Wm             M I  34 B  Sept 27
  10056 Parks E F                   36 D  Sept 30
  11221 Piper E A                   23 B   Oct 20
  11453 Patterson F            Cav  28 F   Oct 25
  11676 Prouse P I                   1 I   Oct 30
  11779 Preshall J A               116 C   Nov  3
  12038 Peasly J, S’t               65 H   Nov 16
  12040 Porter W C                  40 H   Nov 16
  12352 Powers J                    21 K   Dec 28
  12551 Poistan J                  183 F   Jan 29 65
  12645 Piper I                     64 F   Feb 13
    344 Ricker Henry           Cav   2 E April  2 64
    908 Rush D                     107 H   May  5
   1642 Radabaugh W H               33 A  June  5
   2030 Ralston W J, S’t            89 C  June 15
   2124 Rawlings S                  45 E  June 17
   2156 Rancey A K                 111 B  June 18
   2281 Rickards W V                33 B  June 20
   2410 Rowe A                     124 F  June 24
   2878 Rees Thos, Cor              98 C  July  4
   3074 Rix Wm                       2 K  July  9
     49 Reed Harmon                103 E   May 25
   3400 Rogers T                    51 C  July 16
   3426 Ralston J M                 89 C  July 16
   3613 Russell L F                111 B  July 20
   3862 Regman O                     2 D  July 24
   3961 Robinson H H, S’t          110 H  July 25
   4061 Reiggs H                    21 F  July 27
   4335 Rex J W                Cav   3 K  July 30
   4777 Robbins A               “    6 D   Aug  5
   5570 Reichardson G               82 G   Aug 14
   5631 Russell J G                116 G   Aug 14
   5639 Read Geo H                  21 H   Aug 14
   5641 Redder G                    45 G   Aug 14
   6488 Robbins D B                 89 I   Aug 22
   6511 Ross J                      59 A   Aug 22
   6835 Ridgeway Jno                23 D   Aug 25
   6948 Redd C                     122 H   Aug 26
   7174 Ross A                      45 H   Aug 29
   7353 Roberts Ed                  75 K   Aug 31
   7639 Rutain E B                  44 E  Sept  2
   7844 Russell Jas                  9 E  Sept  4
   8521 Rhotin W                     2 C  Sept 12
   8747 Riley W M, Cor              89 B  Sept 14
   8818 Robertson R                120 D  Sept 15
   9614 Robinson J                  65 D  Sept 23
   9617 Rose Jno                    72 H  Sept 23
  10165 Riper O H                  110 G   Oct  1
  10354 Rogers C                    13 H   Oct  5 64
  10658 Rochelle Jno, Cor          135 F   Oct 11
  11279 Romain J                    59 H   Oct 21
  11360 Reese A                     80 C   Oct 23
  11413 Reese R                     59 D   Oct 24
  11646 Rapp N                      10 A   Oct 30
  11657 Robbins P                  122 H   Oct 30
  11672 Robinson C             Cav   2 E   Oct 30
  11859 Rourk J                      6 G   Nov  6
  12366 Repan A                     47 A   Dec 31
  12647 Rapp D C                     2 C   Feb 13 65
  12692 Ramsbottom A F              99 D   Feb 22
   1763 Rei J                      124 K  June  6 64
     33 Smith J E              Cav   7 C   Mar  9
     44 Smith H B                   82 B   Mar 14
     58 Strill Michael             100 K   Mar 18
    231 Sears Samuel           Cav   2 F   Mar 29
    260 Stephen H                  100 B   Mar 31
    263 Shields Geo            Cav   7 L   Mar 31
    284 Saughessy Jno               45 B April  1
    481 Steele Abraham              80 H April  9
    594 Swench W                    45 A April 16
    653 Snyder Lewis                89 C April 20
    726 Sweeny Sam             Cav   7 G April 25
    771 Shannon Chas                45 I April 28
    804 Starbuck F                  62 E April 29
    937 Storer Jno                  17 A   May  7
    962 Smith Jno              Cav   7 F   May  8
    994 Smith Wm                   103 E   May 10
   1160 Samse Wm                    14 H   May 17
   1179 Smith Conrad               100 A   May 18
   1183 Smith Wm                     2 G   May 18
   1229 Spangler A                  45 E   May 20
   1281 Swineheart J W             111 B   May 22
   1404 Seyman Aaron                89 D   May 27
   1672 Sprague W L            Cav   6 K  June  6
   1773 Simmons Jno            Bat  22 -  June  9
   2220 Shannon E                   35 A  June 20
   2230 Stanett J                   45 C  June 20
   2376 Stiver J                    93 C  June 23
   2524 Smith G W                   11 K  June 26
   2575 Sampson C                   89 D  June 27
   2638 Stults P                    45 F  June 29
   2783 Shiver L                    31 B  July  2
   2792 Smith N H                    1 H  July  2
   3116 Smith G, S’t                21 I  July 10
     42 Sabine Alonzo              100 A   May 11
   3252 Short Jas, S’t         Cav   4 A  July 13
   3288 Smith D                      7 H  July 13
   3361 Saffle J                     2 E  July 15
   3536 Steward C S                 33 K  July 18
   3602 Stevenson D                111 B  July 19
   3298 Squires Thos                49 C  July 20
   3744 Snyder Thos                  9 G  July 21
   3770 Smith D, Cor                 2 I  July 22
   3794 Sever H H                    2 C  July 22
   4249 Shephard J H, Cor            2 E  July 29
   4275 Smith J B, S’t               1 B  July 29
   4294 Steward J, S’t               2 K  July 30
   4745 Steiner J M                 72 F   Aug  5
   5018 Smock A                     93 D   Aug  8
   5054 Smarz A                     93 E   Aug  8
   5066 Shipple John           Cav   6 G   Aug  8
   5133 Scott S E                    4 I   Aug  9
   5287 Stevenson John             111 B   Aug 11
   5330 Spegle F                    14 D   Aug 11
   5373 Schem J                    101 K   Aug 11 64
   5455 Stevens G W                101 K   Aug 12
   5896 Sullivan W                  78 D   Aug 16
   6010 Staley G                    89 A   Aug 17
   6032 Smith Wm               Cav   9 G   Aug 18
   6178 Simpson W J                 32 F   Aug 19
   6199 Sheddy G                     2 K   Aug 19
   6214 Shaw Geo W                 105 A   Aug 20
   6253 Shoulder E                  24 F   Aug 20
   6779 Soper P                     72 G   Aug 25
   6870 Scarberry O                 89 D   Aug 26
   7034 Sutton J                     4 A   Aug 27
   7065 Shoemaker J, S’t            47 E   Aug 28
   7436 Stinchear F E, S’t         101 A  Sept  1
   7475 Shafer J                     9 G  Sept  1
   7540 Sell Adam                  125 E  Sept  2
   7788 Stewart John S              19 B  Sept  4
   7897 Smith H H              Cav   2 A  Sept  5
   7986 Selb Jacob                  28 -  Sept  6
   8014 Shriver Geo                 45 K  Sept  6
   8015 Snider Jas                   4 C  Sept  6
   8156 Sturtevant W                72 A  Sept  8
   8197 Shrouds J              Bat   6 -  Sept  8
   8200 Stroufe A                    7 E  Sept  8
   8229 Shaw W                      15 I  Sept  9
   8300 Smith N                    121 H  Sept  9
   8319 Sheldon W                   49 E  Sept 10
   8422 Sullivan Jno               135 F  Sept 11
   8728 Sisson P B                  18 H  Sept 14
   8752 Sickles J                   51 I  Sept 14
   8914 Simmonds S P                 1 A  Sept 16
   8931 Stull G                     15 G  Sept 16
   9009 Sharp F S                   63 K  Sept 17
   9244 Schmall J D                 12 E  Sept 19
   9386 Smith L                    158 H  Sept 20
   9645 Scott J H                   33 H  Sept 24
   9649 Skiver J                   114 H  Sept 24
  10250 Sheets W                    81 A   Oct  3
  10312 Spencer S M, Cor            89 E   Oct  4
  10434 Shingle D              Cav   2 L   Oct  6
  10437 Stanford P W, S’t      Cav   2 A   Oct  6
  10576 Stonchecks J D              51 F   Oct  9
  10618 Schafer P                  101 I   Oct 10
  10703 Stout Samson                 2 F   Oct 11
  10833 Sheppard Jno                34 D   Oct 13
  11139 Shark H                     72 F   Oct 17
  11146 Smith G A, Cor              45 F   Oct 19
  11249 Sullivan F                  76 C   Oct 21
  11433 Swaney E                   124 A   Oct 24
  11579 Smith P                     69 I   Oct 28
  11595 Sapp W N, S’t               20 E   Oct 28
  11711 Spiker J                   122 -   Nov  1
  11797 Shaler F, Cor               72 E   Nov  4
  12105 Sly F                       89 G   Nov 20
  12281 Singer J                     6 G   Dec 13
  12305 Sweet M, S’t                49 F   Dec 18
  12441 Shoemaker C                  8 F   Jan 12 65
  12538 Stewart A F                  2 D   Jan 27
  12562 Sponcerlar Geo              71 B   Jan 31
  12668 Shorter W                   89 K   Feb 17
  12769 Sloan L                    123 D   Mar 13
  12789 Stroup S                    50 B   Mar 17
  12793 Seeley N                   132 D   Mar 18
  12810 Scott R                     75 G   Mar 24
    730 Tweedy R               Cav   1 A April 25 64
    743 Trescott Samuel              2 C April 26
    999 Trimmer Wm                  40 H   May 10
   1196 Turney U S             Cav   2 G   May 18 64
   1496 Thomas Wm              Cav  10 M   May 30
   4784 Thompson J                   2 E   Aug  5
   4951 Toroman W R                 13 E   Aug  7
   5356 Tierney W              Art   1 L   Aug 11
   5552 Tinsley M                   90 B   Aug 13
   5668 Terilliger N                12 C   Aug 14
   6330 Tanner A, S’t               32 G   Aug 21
   7224 Thompson V B                26 C   Aug 29
   7246 Turner S B                  45 B   Aug 30
   7640 Thomas Jas                  44 C  Sept  2
   8850 Talbert R                  135 F  Sept 15
   9774 Thomas N                   103 B  Sept 26
   9945 Townsend J                  26 C  Sept 28
  10471 Tattman B                  153 C   Oct  7
  10800 Tinway R                    93 -   Oct 12
  11820 Townsley E M, S’t           89 B   Nov  5
  12577 Tensdale T H           Cav   2 E   Feb  3 65
  12251 Uchre S                     12 E   Dec  9 64
   2194 Vining W H H                45 G  June 19
   3902 Valentine C                123 H  July 24
   4450 Vaugh B                    125 F   Aug  1
   4497 Vangrider H                103 H   Aug  1
   5263 Vatier J F             Cav   6 -   Aug 10
   6170 Vail Jno L, S’t             17 C   Aug 19
   6859 Vanaman M                   21 E   Aug 26
   6985 Vanderveer A                 6 H   Aug 27
   7756 Victor H               Art   1 D  Sept  4
   9576 Volis J                     34 H  Sept 23
  10252 Vail N                      12 K   Oct  3
  10389 Vail G M                     7 D   Oct  5
  10472 Van Fleet H                 14 I   Oct  7
  11095 Van Kirk G                 135 B   Oct 18
  11097 Van Malley J M              89 G   Oct 18
  12554 Vanhorn S              Cav   9 C   Jan 30 65
      7 Wiley Samuel                82 A   Mch  5 64
    185 Wickman Wm                 111 B   Mch 27
    779 Wooley Jno                  45 B April 28
    807 Werts Louis                 45 D April 30
   1085 Wood Wm                     89 A   May 14
   1449 Wentling Joseph            100 K   May 29
   1604 Wood Joseph                 15 B  June  4
   1836 Wilkinson W, Cor            89 D  June 11
   1913 Wilson Jas                  93 I  June 13
   2020 Way Jno                     44 I  June 15
   2041 Windgrove S R               15 -  June 15
   2172 Webb E                      45 A  June 19
   2358 Walters F                    9 E  June 23
   2536 Wing                   Cav   2 M  June 26
   2815 Willis A                    89 A  July  3
   2840 Wroten L                    89 H  July  3
   3188 Williams D                  90 A  July 12
     34 Wright Wm                    7 H April 24
   3310 White H                     15 A  July 15
   3325 Whitten G                   75 K  July 14
   4214 West J B                    89 B  July 29
   4681 Witt Jno T                  93 G   Aug  4
   4688 Won J, Cor                 111 B   Aug  4
   4695 Wile A, Cor                 33 D   Aug  4
   5121 Winder I                    70 D   Aug  9
   5211 Wood N L               Cav   4 L   Aug 10
   5726 Winters Geo                145 K   Aug 15
   6314 Wainwright S G              89 G   Aug 20
   6318 Wisser F J                  35 A   Aug 20
   6362 Wistman N                    9 G   Aug 21
   6397 Wilson E                     4 A   Aug 21
   6700 Watson G                    21 A   Aug 24
   6761 Wood S                     123 A   Aug 22 64
   7056 Wood W H                    59 E   Aug 28
   7373 Wyatt J                     90 B   Aug 31
   7582 Wentworth L                 72 A  Sept  1
   8298 Wright J S                  89 E  Sept  9
   8396 Warner T                    14 C  Sept 10
   8907 Wyckmann D                  73 G  Sept 16
   9384 Worte J                    116 -  Sept 20
   9527 Woodruff J M               135 F  Sept 22
   9691 Wagner J                    93 F  Sept 24
  10007 Whitney E                   21 K  Sept 29
  10230 Williams Orland         C    7 K   Oct  2
  10309 Weaver M                    72 H   Oct  4
  10402 Ward Francis                21 H   Oct  6
  10464 Whitehead A B               33 E   Oct  7
  10528 Wiley A                     26 I   Oct  8
  10733 White I                     73 E   Oct 11
  10844 Westbrook R L, Cor         135 F   Oct 13
  11013 Walker C                    65 I   Oct 16
  11034 Waldron H                   14 A   Oct 16
  11417 Williams S M                60 F   Oct 24
  11770 Worthen D                  122 B   Nov  3
  11874 Weason J                    35 F   Nov  6
  12042 Wickham J                   14 H   Nov 16
  12073 White R M                   15 D   Nov 18
  12158 Warner B F                  35 E   Nov 25
  12584 Whitaker E                  72 A   Feb  4 65
  12722 Wella E                     57 A   Mch  3
  12759 Winklet T              Cav   - -   Mch 12 McL’s Sqn
  12786 Warner M                   102 G   Mch 16
   4833 Webricks Josh H              9 G   Aug  6 64
    638 Yuterler W A                45 E April 20
   5477 Younker S                   80 F   Aug 13
   6068 Young Jno                    7 E   Aug 18
   7816 Yeager Jno             Cav   7 B  Sept  4
   7876 Young J                      9 F  Sept  5
  10583 Young W                      6 G   Oct 10
  12659 Young W                     15 A   Feb 16 65
   3225 Zubers J M                 100 B  July 12 64
  11253 Zink A J                    72 E   Oct 21
    TOTAL 1031.


PENNSYLVANIA.

    224 Attwood Abr’m           C   18 I   Mch 29 64
    250 Armidster M            Cav   4 A   Mch 30
    468 Ackerman C                   8 B April  9
    758 Arb Simon              Cav   4 C April 27
    846 Allbeck G B, S’t            52 F   May  3
    975 Algert H K                  54 F   May  9
   1282 Arble Thos             Cav  13 A   May 26
   1837 Ait M                       21 K  June 11
   2348 Akers Geo                   90 H  June 23
   2398 Allison E                   55 K  June 24
   2547 Anderson D, S’t            103 K  June 27
   2648 Able J                      54 F  June 20
   2956 Amagart Eli, S’t           103 F  July  6
   3018 Ackley G B             Art   3 B  July  7
   3917 Alexander M            Cav   1 F  July 14
   3967 Ardray J F, S’t             13 F  July 25
   4055 Anderson J, Cor             79 I  July 27
   4143 Aches T J                    7 H  July 28
   4149 Alcorn Geo W               145 F  July 28
   4495 Archart H                   51 C  July 29
   4673 Allen C                Cav   8 K   Aug  4
   4973 Andertin J             Cav   4 L   Aug  7
   5286 Aler B                     103 D   Aug 11
   5511 Ault J L                   101 C   Aug 13
   5862 Armstrong Cas, S’t     Cav   4 C   Aug 16 64
   6029 Anersen Jno                 91 C   Aug 18
   7163 Arnold Daniel              184 C   Aug 29
   7887 Angstedt Geo W               1 F  Sept  5
   8185 Allen J L                  101 I  Sept  8
   8232 Ambler C               Cav  13 D  Sept  9
   8388 Alexander W            Res   2 I  Sept 10
   8653 Armstrong A                  7 K  Sept 13
   8655 Arnold L                    73 A  Sept 13
   8765 Altimus Wm                   7 E  Sept 14
   1743 Ainley Wm              Cav   3 E  June  8
   9150 Alcorn J W              “   18 D  Sept 18
   9896 Allison D B                 55 K  Sept 27
  10487 Anderson A                 135 F   Oct  7
  10570 Allen D                    126 A   Oct  9
  10823 Allin S                Cav   7 H   Oct 13
  11419 Applebay T M               149 K   Oct 24
  11607 Antill J                    61 I   Oct 28
  11710 Auger W                    118 -   Nov  1
  11852 Affleck T                    2 F   Nov  6
  11860 Amandt J                   184 D   Nov  6
  12520 Atchinson W P              142 F   Jan 25 65
    228 Bull Frank             Cav   4 H   Mar 29 64
    249 Burton Lafayette        C   18 D   Mar 30
    332 Briggs Andrew           C   13 H April  2
    427 Begler A                    27 C April  8
    543 Breel Jacob, Cor            27 H April 14
    569 Black Jas A            Cav  14 D April 15
    661 Bradley Alex            “    3 F April 21
    671 Burns Sam                   73 K April 22
    673 Barra J                     54 F April 22
    822 Bayne Wm                   145 I   May  1
    874 Bradley M              Art   3 A   May  4
    897 Brown Henry                 90 H   May  5
    938 Brown D                      4 C   May  7
    974 Batting Isaac, Cor     Cav   8 H   May  9
   1046 Baker J D                   57 F   May 12
   1188 Butler Wm                   90 B   May 18
   1300 Boyd Thomas                  9 D   May 23
   1309 Bryson J               Cav   2 D   May 23
   1327 Brining J               “   13 B   May 24
   1375 Burney J                “   13 G   May 26
   1393 Brown J B               “    4 K   May 26
   1576 Boman Sam’l            Art   3 B  June  3
   1601 Berfert R                  103 B  June  4
   1654 Brumley Geo            Cav   4 I  June  5
   1790 Butler J D                  76 B  June 10
   1859 Berkhawn H                  73 G  June 12
   1872 Brooks D S                  79 -  June 12
   1923 Brian Chas                 183 F  June 14
   1999 Bixter R                    73 C  June 15
   2026 Burns Owen             Cav  13 C  June 15
   2046 Bigler M                “    4 -  June 15
   2127 Brown C                 “    3 B  June 17
   2134 Buckhannan W           Art   3 B  June 18
   2180 Ball L                      26 K  June 19
   2236 Barr J T               Cav   4 K  June 20
   2323 Baker Henry             “   18 I  June 22
   2483 Bisel Jno, S’t          “   18 K  June 25
   2539 Balsley Wm              “   20 F  June 26
   2610 Brown M                 “   14 C  June 28
   2727 Brenn J                     73 K  July  1
   2733 Bolt J H, S’t          Cav  18 E  July  1
   2741 Beam Jno                    76 E  July  1
   2816 Burns Jno              Cav  13 A  July  3
   2913 Bish J                     108 F  July  5
   2918 Belford Jno                115 F  July  5
   3005 Bryan P                Art   3 A  July  7 64
   3019 Barr S                     103 G  July  7
   3027 Braney J                    48 E  July  7
   3051 Barnes W, Cor              101 H  July  8
   3097 Butler L J                 118 E  July 10
   3109 Brunt A                    110 G  July 10
   3216 Beraine A A                101 B  July 12
   3294 Burns Jas                  103 F  July 14
   3442 Brinton J                  157 D  July 17
   3477 Baker Wm                   103 F  July 17
   3535 Burnside J, S’t             57 H  July 18
   3600 Black W O                  103 G  July 19
   3693 Billig J L             Cav   3 H  July 21
   3716 Brenlinger W R, S’t     “    4 D  July 21
   3808 Butter C P                 148 A  July 22
   3821 Batchell D                  55 D  July 23
   3917 Bright E                    90 I  July 23
   3988 Bradford L                  10 I  July 26
   4002 Berkley M                   50 I  July 26
   4084 Backner Adam               116 G  July 27
   4330 Barrett J                    6 K  July 30
   4360 Brown J                     53 G  July 31
   4402 Butler D                    53 G  July 31
   4494 Barton Jas             Cav   4 B   Aug  1
   4500 Burke J                     90 A   Aug  1
   4610 Baker E, Cor                 4 K   Aug  3
   4667 Behreas A                    7 E   Aug  4
   4752 Bennett Geo                 55 D   Aug  5
   4989 Bowers J               Art   2 I   Aug  7
   5040 Bammratta ——                73 D   Aug  8
   5071 Barber C                     6 D   Aug  8
   5084 Buck B F               Cav   2 K   Aug  8
   5113 Brown M                     50 D   Aug  9
   5324 Burlingame A J             141 K   Aug 11
   5391 Bear Jno                    79 D   Aug 12
   5416 Bruce Jno                  101 C   Aug 12
   5526 Bower Benj             Cav   6 L   Aug 13
   5587 Burnham H                  143 F   Aug 14
   5592 Broadbuck A            Cav  11 A   Aug 14
   5662 Buck B F                “    2 K   Aug 14
   5877 Browning Thos              103 A   Aug 16
   5948 Bohnaberger A              115 G   Aug 17
   5969 Boyer F                     43 E   Aug 17
   6061 Baker Jas                  101 C   Aug 18
   6074 Bower G W                  103 K   Aug 18
   6099 Baily J F                   18 D   Aug 18
   6127 Benhand J A                103 D   Aug 19
   6229 Bear Sam’l                  55 G   Aug 20
   6244 Boles M S, Cor         Cav   4 K   Aug 20
   6279 Bower C                    101 C   Aug 20
   6319 Birney J               Cav   4 C   Aug 20
   6359 Bennett A                   67 K   Aug 21
   6542 Blackman W                  18 D   Aug 23
   6551 Bannon P                     7 A   Aug 23
   6554 Baldwin C H            Cav   2 K   Aug 23
   6604 Barnett E T                149 I   Aug 23
   6621 Bell Thos                   11 E   Aug 23
   6660 Blair Jno G                 46 F   Aug 24
   6663 Breckinridge W              73 K   Aug 24
   6688 Bowman A                    63 B   Aug 24
   6701 Boyd J W                   101 C   Aug 24
   6704 Beemer Wm                  145 K   Aug 24
   6887 Brown T, Cor           Cav  11 I   Aug 26
   6928 Bryan L                    106 F   Aug 26
   7125 Bridaham H W                55 H   Aug 28
   7181 Bemer S                    184 E   Aug 29
   7347 Ball P                      49 H   Aug 31
   7460 Barnes W                   119 G  Sept  1 64
   7477 Bennett J                   55 D  Sept  1
   7541 Barnett M                  145 K  Sept  2
   7684 Black J                    143 I  Sept  3
   7747 Blair J G                   49 E  Sept  3
   7775 Brink F                Cav  11 M  Sept  4
   7940 Browers J A                184 F  Sept  5
   7963 Brumley Fred’k              54 K  Sept  6
   8073 Bright Adam, Cor           101 K  Sept  7
   8075 Boland                     183 I  Sept  7
   8256 Barr P                     103 C  Sept  9
   8286 Brown L                Cav   8 C  Sept  9
   8356 Brown A                    101 H  Sept 10
   8358 Brickenstaff W             101 I  Sept 10
   8363 Bruce J B, S’t             101 F  Sept 10
   8413 Blosser Jonas          Res   7 H  Sept 11
   8434 Bowsteak T D, S’t          106 H  Sept 11
   8499 Bicklet E H                 57 K  Sept 11
   8606 Boots E N                  101 H  Sept 12
   8719 Beattie Robert              95 D  Sept 14
   8769 Boyer J M, S’t         Cav   7 F  Sept 14
   8795 Bentley T                   54 H  Sept 14
   8794 Brown P                     55 A  Sept 15
   8902 Baker J                    184 C  Sept 16
   8917 Baker Wm               Cav  11 -  Sept 16
   9147 Blake E                     69 K  Sept 18
   9520 Boyler Jas                   7 E  Sept 22
   9632 Baldwin A                   51 K  Sept 24
   9745 Bowers F               Cav   5 A  Sept 25
   9809 Bonewell W W            “   14 C  Sept 26
   9952 Blair Geo              Art   7 -  Sept 28
  10201 Burdge H               Cav   3 D   Oct  2
  10226 Byers J                     22 E   Oct  2
  10260 Burns J                    103 E   Oct  3
  10292 Brown G M                   10 I   Oct  4
  10357 Burgess H                   27 C   Oct  5
  10534 Buck D C               Cav   2 L   Oct  8
  10577 Ballinger Geo               87 D   Oct  9
  10674 Blackman W                  84 A   Oct 11
  10758 Beightel J F                51 G   Oct 12
  10779 Boice J N                  145 G   Oct 12
  10783 Bowling J                    3 A   Oct 12
  10943 Barthart I                 116 H   Oct 14
  10980 Baney Geo                    4 I   Oct 15
  10983 Bowyer J S                  55 E   Oct 15
  11024 Bunker F                    55 K   Oct 16
  11087 Bowman G                   149 E   Oct 18
  11322 Bissel B                   142 F   Oct 22
  11329 Bruce A                     11 I   Oct 23
  11434 Berk G                      51 A   Oct 24
  11445 Ball J, Cor                 19 K   Oct 25
  14504 Bain G                     183 G   Oct 26
  11528 Baney I                Cav   4 I   Oct 26
  11556 Baker B H                  148 B   Oct 27
  11563 Brock C                     46 A   Oct 27
  11569 Beighley W                 103 C   Oct 27
  11597 Blair Jno                  106 H   Oct 28
  11611 Boyer T                     11 F   Oct 28
  11635 Burr E                     145 K   Oct 28
  11674 Bolinger G                  87 D   Oct 30
  11818 Bayley H                    66 K   Nov  4
  11894 Burch W                Art   2 F   Nov  7
  11929 Burke J D              Cav  22 D   Nov  9
  11972 Bupp L                     149 G   Nov 12
  12039 Bailey J J             Art   2 F   Nov 16
  12059 Bogar David, S’t           184 C   Nov 17
  12079 Bond C C                    20 K   Nov 18
  12096 Brady N                Cav   5 M   Nov 19 64
  12168 Brubaker B P, Cor           79 D   Nov 26
  12177 Braddock T                  77 C   Nov 27
  12418 Barrens J              Cav   5 G   Jan  9 65
  12812 Barnett J                    6 D   Mar 25
   2917 Brim Jas                    56 I  July  5 64
  12665 Bennett J                  184 E   Feb 16 65
     45 Carter Wm                  139 H   Mar 14 64
     97 Chase Wm B, S’t        Cav  15 C   Mar 22
    156 Compsey Jas             “   14 H   Mar 25
    355 Carman F H                  54 F   Apr  2
    445 Coyle P                     45 A   Apr  9
    466 Crouch Levi                 40 I   Apr  9
    479 Croghan Jno, S’t       Cav   3 A   Apr  9
    548 Case Daniel             “    8 M   Apr 14
    734 Conner Andrus C              4 L   Apr 25
    837 Cravener S P           Cav  14 K   May  1
    869 Curry A                    119 E   May  3
   1015 Campbell Wm            Cav   8 E   May 10
   1099 Case Silas, Cor         “    2 L   May 14
   1138 Carmichael G            “   18 K   May 16
   1186 Crisholm J H               150 H   May 18
   1206 Caldwell S A           Cav  14 E   May 19
   1232 Coburg M C              “    6 L   May 20
   1490 Coon J H                “   18 K   May 31
   1498 Campbell H B               103 E   May 31
   1530 Clatter F              Cav  18 C   May 31
   1702 Calihan Thos            “   14 H  June  7
   1781 Cephas L                   145 I  June  8
   1829 Carter Wm                  101 K  June 11
   1832 Calvert R R, S’t             6 B  June 11
   1871 Coombs Jno             Art   3 -  June 12
   1873 Cox J A                Cav 113 -  June 12
   2069 Cooper T                “   18 K  June 16
   2349 Curry R                     73 F  June 23
   2399 Coyle H                Cav   8 F  June 24
   2455 Crouse E                   141 A  June 25
   2695 Copple F                    54 H  June 30
   2713 Chapman J                    7 H  July  1
   2849 Carron Jas             Cav   4 C  July  4
   2884 Calean Sam’l               103 K  July  4
   2995 Coleman J, S’t         Cav  18 K  July  7
   3320 Chase F M                   72 G  July 14
   3362 Clark N                Cav   8 D  July 15
   3417 Caton W T                   49 D  July 16
   3430 Couch Benj                  50 H  July 17
   3948 Coyle Ed                    58 E  July 25
   3993 Curtey L                    10 I  July 26
   4045 Carpenter L                 12 K  July 27
   4117 Cantrill M                   6 B  July 28
   4263 Conklin N                   90 K  July 29
   4331 Chapman J              Art   3 B  July 30
   4353 Crawford M             Cav  14 G  July 31
   4357 Cox Jas                    103 A  July 31
   4369 Claybaugh G W           A    2 F  July 31
   4512 Crock H, Cor                45 A   Aug  1
   4682 Croup W S                  103 L   Aug  4
   4729 Cochran C                  103 I   Aug  4
   4903 Chew Jno, Cor               18 F   Aug  6
   5177 Cranes E               Cav   4 M   Aug  9
   5375 Campbell Jas            “    3 F   Aug 11
   5417 Cregg J G                   54 I   Aug 12
   5423 Cumberland T C              14 B   Aug 12
   5484 Conahan M                  115 B   Aug 13
   5578 Carpenter W C              145 G   Aug 14
   5584 Campbell R D                11 E   Aug 14
   5623 Cox H, Cor             Cav   7 B   Aug 14
   5828 Cummings Benj                3 A   Aug 16 64
   5979 Conor J N                  184 C   Aug 17
   6237 Corbin W                    49 C   Aug 20
   6269 Campbell R G                11 C   Aug 20
   6320 Coon George                  2 F   Aug 21
   6336 Cameron Wm, Cor            101 A   Aug 21
   6395 Connelly Wm                 55 C   Aug 21
   6430 Conner J                     6 D   Aug 22
   6502 Cline J                      3 H   Aug 22
   6615 Crawford J                  77 E   Aug 23
   6645 Coleman C                   19 E   Aug 23
   6746 Conly Jno                  101 A   Aug 24
   6913 Craft A                     90 G   Aug 26
   7045 Cobert F C             Cav  11 L   Aug 27
   7095 Carr J                      51 G   Aug 28
   7116 Cathcart Robt              103 H   Aug 29
   7209 Crain J                Cav   4 H   Aug 29
   7456 Craig Wm                   103 D  Sept  1
   7463 Clay Henry                 184 A  Sept  1
   7617 Curry S                    140 C  Sept  2
   7632 Carroll A              Cav   2 A  Sept  2
   7669 Campbell G T           Art   3 A  Sept  3
   7696 Criser M                    54 F  Sept  3
   8117 Crawford J A               103 B  Sept  8
   8121 Collins M                  101 K  Sept  8
   8169 Cole J C                   118 K  Sept  8
   8260 Chapman ——                  18 A  Sept  9
   8512 Coyle M, Cor                79 B  Sept 12
   8594 Culver J                    69 -  Sept 12
   8665 Clutler L                   11 C  Sept 13
   8700 Cavender J L               119 E  Sept 14
   8884 Cysey A              Hvy A   3 -  Sept 15
   9094 Coffman Wm                  13 F  Sept 18
   9134 Cramer E                    55 F  Sept 18
   9141 Church C H, Cor             45 B  Sept 18
   9269 Clark J                    101 -  Sept 19
   9396 Coats S R                  135 C  Sept 20
   9410 Combs S                      1 H  Sept 21
   9508 Clonay J                   145 F  Sept 22
   9554 Crum C                     149 G  Sept 23
   9639 Cline J                    118 A  Sept 24
   9773 Coulter G                   45 K  Sept 25
   9823 Cummings R                  65 K  Sept 27
   9886 Callahan M                  52 D  Sept 27
   9931 Conrad W               Cav  14 M  Sept 28
  10104 Campbell Wm             “   13 D  Sept 30
  10120 Coats L R                  139 H   Oct  1
  10274 Crawford Geo                 1 F   Oct  3
  10276 Cantler J L                 13 A   Oct  3
  10283 Cromich F                    7 H   Oct  4
  10386 Cornelius Wm           Cav   7 -   Oct  5
  10399 Cullingford P               55 C   Oct  6
  10443 Clark W                Cav   5 K   Oct  7
  10462 Canby G C               “    2 E   Oct  7
  10497 Coperhewer Wm, Cor           1 D   Oct  8
  10541 Culberton Louis             73 B   Oct  9
  10842 Corbin M                   184 D   Oct 13
  10847 Clark G                Cav   1 H   Oct 13
  11005 Coe Geo W                  145 E   Oct 16
  11025 Clark J                      3 D   Oct 16
  11250 Clark H                    184 F   Oct 21
  11309 Clark E B                  101 B   Oct 22
  11370 Carrol W                   145 B   Oct 23
  11436 Crawford L                 184 R   Oct 24
  11438 Cole H O               Cav   2 L   Oct 24
  11477 Campbell C A            “   11 C   Oct 26
  11565 Creagan G               “    1 F   Oct 27
  11614 Crawford M                  14 K   Oct 28 64
  11656 Coyle H                     54 K   Oct 30
  11659 Craney Geo             Cav  20 L   Oct 30
  11800 Cregger W H             “    5 G   Nov  4
  11815 Chacon A W                 106 B   Nov  4
  11826 Colebaugh W                 60 K   Nov  5
  11876 Crandall L                 145 I   Nov  6
  11922 Cleaveland E           Cav  10 I   Nov  8
  11993 Crampton A B               143 B   Nov 13
  12120 Cullen T I                  31 I   Nov 22
  12141 Conway C C             Art   2 A   Nov 23
  12255 Crompton F G                71 F   Dec 10
  12295 Cone S                     115 E   Dec 16
  12301 Culp P K                   138 B   Dec 17
  12368 Connor S                   112 H   Jan  1 65
  12424 Clark J                     89 D   Jan  9
  12487 Collins G                  118 E   Jan 19
  12599 Cassell D                   20 E   Feb  6
  12672 Clark F D                    7 C   Feb 20
  12818 Copeland B             Cav  14 D   Mar 29
   1961 Culbertson Jno          “   13 B  June 14 64
    152 Davidson H                  57 I   Mar 25
    866 Dorr Phineas               119 K   May  3
   1020 Doran McK                   63 D   May 11
   1161 Duntler Henry, Cor          51 K   May 16
   1338 Dooner M                     2 K   May 24
   1463 Davis Richard          Cav   3 L   May 29
   1541 Deamott J K                 45 C  June  1
   1545 Davis Isaac            Cav   8 H  June  1
   2630 Dun R B                    101 B  June 29
   2657 Donovan J                  139 K  June 29
   2716 Deily Wm                    53 H  July  1
   2938 Davis M                Cav  22 B  July  6
   3338 Degret N                “   15 M  July 15
   3363 Davidson Chas              100 M  July 15
   3741 Dallin Jas             Cav   8 H  July 21
   3795 Davis J                    103 A  July 22
   3873 Davis M H                  103 E  July 24
   3985 Dougherty J                  7 E  July 26
   4087 Deron Robt                 149 B  July 29
   4202 Drenkle J A                 79 K  July 29
   5232 Dechmam Jno                184 G  July 29
   4481 Dodrick Louis               50 I   Aug  1
   4491 Denton M               Cav   9 B   Aug  1
   4497 Day Wm                      97 A   Aug  1
   4625 Davis J                    101 E   Aug  3
   4711 Dort C R               Cav   4 H   Aug  4
   4786 Dondle Robt                101 A   Aug  5
   4792 Davy H, Cor                 68 K   Aug  5
   4806 Davenbrook J J             101 G   Aug  5
   4885 Delaney J                  101 A   Aug  6
   4897 Dunbar Jno             Cav  14 M   Aug  6
   4910 Dean J                     148 F   Aug  6
   5023 Dawlin                     110 D   Aug  8
   5256 Ditztell L                  73 I   Aug 10
   5431 Davidson Geo                57 C   Aug 12
   5468 Dougherty                  101 I   Aug 13
   5664 Decker J                    45 B   Aug 14
   5740 Day And H              Cav   2 H   Aug 15
   5746 Doran P                     99 I   Aug 15
   6017 Deal F                      63 A   Aug 17
   6045 Degroot H, S’t         Cav  13 A   Aug 18
   6176 Defree Jas                  15 G   Aug 19
   6226 Dodd J                      18 F   Aug 20
   6316 Davis Wm                   153 A   Aug 20
   6568 Dawney Geo                 148 B   Aug 23
   9679 Donavan D                   90 B   Aug 24
   6678 Dunn Johnes                 69 F   Aug 25 64
   6797 Dailey M                     7 I   Aug 25
   6879 Dunn Jno                   184 A   Aug 26
   7053 Dakenfelt J                 55 D   Aug 28
   7077 Deets R                      3 A   Aug 28
   7282 Day S, Cor                  13 A   Aug 30
   7360 Dively J                   110 C   Aug 31
   7488 Dilks C                      1 K  Sept  1
   7651 Dewell Samuel               50 G  Sept  3
   7828 Dougherty J                184 D  Sept  4
   8211 Dixon J                    105 B  Sept  8
   8334 Doherty J, S’t              73 F  Sept 10
   8569 Duff J, S’t            Cav   4 B  Sept 12
   8579 Dougherty F                 90 C  Sept 12
   8718 Durharse B             Cav  11 G  Sept 14
   8828 Donnelly J                  97 H  Sept 15
   8887 Dean R                 Cav   2 M  Sept 15
   9109 Davidson C                  90 G  Sept 18
   9146 Driscoll N C                26 I  Sept 18
   9191 Duffie J                    52 F  Sept 18
   9289 Delaney E                    7 G  Sept 19
  10004 Davidson G, Cor             12 K  Sept 29
  10193 Dougherty M            Cav   3 D   Oct  2
  10436 Durkale Jno             “    1 F   Oct  6
  10917 Dalzell J G                139 I   Oct 14
  11295 Derry Frederick             20 C   Oct 22
  11350 Dichell Espy                55 D   Oct 23
  11394 Dewitt M               Cav   1 E   Oct 24
  11628 Davidson S                 184 A   Oct 28
  11988 Dickens Chas           Art   2 A   Oct 13
  12136 Dalrysuffle J E            145 K   Oct 23
  12399 Donley P                   120 G   Jan  5 65
  12575 Deeds J                Cav  13 H   Feb  2
  11181 Dixon B                    145 K   Oct 19 64
    972 Ellers Henry           Cav  13 H   May  9
   1081 Eisley Jno              “   18 K   May 14
   1436 Engle Peter             “   14 K   May 28
   2105 Elliott Jno             “   13 F  June 17
   2794 Elliott J                   69 D  July  2
   3038 Erwin C                     78 D  July  8
   3052 Epsey Jas, S’t             145 H  July  9
   3295 Elliott J P                103 D  July 14
   3823 Ebright Benj           Cav   9 A  July 23
   4278 Eaton Nat            Rifle   1 E  July 30
   4761 Ellenberger P              145 D   Aug  5
   5687 Ennies Andrew              145 K   Aug 15
   6424 Ewetts Jas                 103 G   Aug 22
   6607 Ellis F                     53 G   Aug 23
   6872 Eckles E                    77 E   Aug 26
   6889 Ensley C                   184 A   Aug 26
   7300 Ellis H H              Cav  18 I   Aug 30
   7657 Egan Jno                    55 C  Sept  3
   8066 Exline Jacob                55 K  Sept  7
   8543 Eichnor C                  143 F  Sept 12
   8964 Earlman J                    7 K  Sept 16
  10009 Elfrey B S                   7 K  Sept 29
  10694 Elliott Jno H               83 D   Oct 11
  10731 Erdibach C, Cor        Cav   5 B   Oct 11
  10799 Ervingfelts Jacob          187 D   Oct 12
  11834 Edgar W H, S’t               7 G   Nov  5
  11838 Erebedier J, S’t             5 B   Nov  5
  12001 Etters D                   145 D   Nov 14
  12673 Ebhart J, Cor               87 E   Feb 18 65
   9490 English J C                100 K  Sept 21 64
    200 Fluher Jno                  73 D   Mar 28
    511 Fich Jno                    83 B   Apr 12
    791 Fry L, S’t             Cav   4 D   Apr 28
   1010 Fuller H                “   13 H   May 10 64
   1098 Fifer Chas                  27 I   May 14
   1431 Fry Alex, Cor          Cav   4 B   May 28
   1728 Fink Peter                  73 C  June  8
   1957 Freeman W M, S’t       Art   4 A  June 14
   2078 Fulton Thos A              103 H  June 17
   2099 Friday S D                 101 H  June 17
   2147 Fish Chas W                101 B  June 18
   2155 Farley Jas                  54 F  June 18
   2261 Fox Geo                     78 E  June 21
   2477 Flay L                      26 G  June 25
   2530 Funkhanna Jas              101 C  June 26
   2537 Fatleam A                   50 D  June 26
   2594 Fagartus T                  90 K  June 28
   2853 Fancy Geo              Cav  13 F  July  4
   3088 Ford M                      53 K  July 19
   3258 Fisher B M, Cor            101 H  July 13
   3582 French A               Art   2 G  July 19
   3742 Forsyth J              Cav  18 H  July 21
   3870 Fingley Jno            Cav  14 D  July 24
   4307 Flick L                    184 G  July 30
   4439 Filey J H                   53 E  July 31
   4452 Foreman G S, Cor       Cav   1 B   Aug  1
   4521 Flashorse B             “   12 A   Aug  2
   4586 Flynn M                 “   13 B   Aug  2
   4642 Fewer E                     87 H   Aug  3
   4668 File C                     145 D   Aug  4
   5062 Fish J                      85 -   Aug  8
   5172 Fleming W, Cor              97 E   Aug  9
   5586 Flickinger Jno              50 B   Aug 14
   5788 Ferry W                     79 A   Aug 15
   5873 Fee Geo M                  103 G   Aug 16
   6092 Faiss A                    145 E   Aug 18
   6134 Farman E                    57 E   Aug 19
   6155 Feltharsen                 145 G   Aug 19
   6180 Fatlenger F                 53 K   Aug 19
   6365 Fanen J F              Res   7 G   Aug 21
   6396 Finlaugh S             Cav  14 G   Aug 21
   6649 Fox R                      155 H   Aug 23
   6675 Fritzman J W, S’t           18 K   Aug 24
   6694 Finlin Thos                143 G   Aug 24
   6881 Fuller G               Cav   2 A   Aug 26
   6884 Frederick L                148 B   Aug 26
   6890 French Jas                 101 H   Aug 26
   6892 Ford Thos                    7 I   Aug 26
   7041 Fullerton E                 99 E   Aug 27
   7097 Fester Jno                 103 B   Aug 28
   7169 Fisher W                    54 I   Aug 29
   7198 Fry                        101 E   Aug 29
   7575 Fitzgerald M               145 K  Sept  2
   7588 Fahy Jno               Cav  13 B  Sept  2
   7776 Fritz D, Cor            “   18 K  Sept  4
   8006 Felter H M, S’t         “   13 K  Sept  6
   8149 Fullerton J                118 I  Sept  8
   8175 Fetterman J                 48 H  Sept  8
   8321 Francis N                   69 G  Sept 10
   8631 Fagan R                    118 F  Sept 13
   9062 Fisher C               Cav   4 -  Sept 17
   9099 Floyd B                     67 K  Sept 18
   9232 Farr J C                   107 H  Sept 19
   9869 Faith Alex                 183 C  Sept 27
  10176 Fessenden N E              149 F   Oct  1
  10408 Fingley S                   14 B   Oct  6
  10639 Fisher W                   101 E   Oct 10
  10667 Flynn S, Cor                76 C   Oct 11
  10688 Free J                     145 H   Oct 11
  11026 Flemming J                  97 E   Oct 16
  11112 Flanney J                  106 K   Oct 18 64
  11164 Ferguson J R           Cav  11 D   Oct 19
  11367 Fox M                   “    8 H   Oct 23
  11378 Frill D                     55 C   Oct 24
  11601 Ferguson Jno               134 A   Oct 28
  11802 Frishi H                   115 E   Nov  4
  11916 Freed S                     53 B   Nov  8
  11962 Fairbanks E                140 A   Nov 11
  12000 Fagley C, Cor          Cav  14 I   Nov 14
  12025 Forest S L                 149 I   Nov 15
  12207 Foster C W                  76 B   Dec  1
  12244 Falkenstine F              148 C   Dec  8
  12336 Fruce J                     52 A   Dec 26
  12445 Fisk J                      67 H   Jan 13 65
  12605 Faile W D              Cav  20 A   Feb  7
     71 Goodman Robt            “   13 M   Mar 19 64
    131 Gesse Christian             54 F   Mar 23
    314 Graffell Wm                 73 B   Apr  2
    529 Guley J                    145 G   Apr 12
    573 Green Wm               Cav   3 A   Apr 16
    968 Garman B                “   18 E   Apr  9
   1001 Greer J A, Cor          “    3 E   May 10
   1008 Graham W J                   4 C   May 10
   1063 Goodman Henry               27 I   May 13
   1302 Gray M                       7 B   May 23
   1373 Gilbert Jno                 29 G   May 25
   1399 Gilroy Berney               73 F   May 26
   1528 Getts B                     84 G   May 31
   1649 Griffil G W            Cav  13 L  June  5
   1761 Geest J W                   57 I  June  9
   1793 Gardner, (negro)             8 F  June 10
   1930 Gensle Jno             Cav  19 F  June 13
   1939 Goerlt E                    73 H  June 14
   2060 Galliger F             Cav  13 B  June 16
   2084 Gilmore Jas                110 E  June 17
   2297 Gunn Alex              Cav   4 D  June 21
   2356 Greenwald G, S’t            27 H  June 23
   2531 Gumbert A, Cor             103 B  June 26
   2587 Gettings J H         Rifle   1 C  June 28
   2944 Gross Sam’l                 51 E  July  6
   2955 Gotwalt H, Cor              55 D  July  6
   2988 Griffin J                  103 I  July  7
   2992 George A                   149 G  July  7
   2996 Gists H                    103 H  July  7
   3037 Gilleland Wm           Cav  14 B  July  8
   3528 Gorsuch M A                110 B  July 18
   3599 Gibbs E                Cav  18 K  July 19
   4944 Gost W H               Cav   5 K   Aug  7
   5422 Gregg T                    139 K   Aug 12
   5655 Gross Jno                   62 K   Aug 14
   5735 Gregg D                    142 A   Aug 15
   5737 Graham Wm                  103 F   Aug 15
   5803 Graham D, Cor          Cav   4 K   Aug 16
   5881 Grouse G                   145 C   Aug 16
   5888 Gettenher D M              103 I   Aug 16
   6006 Geand C, Cor           Cav   4 M   Aug 17
   5288 Gladen A                    21 C   Aug 11
   6140 Garrett Jas                 51 K   Aug 19
   6158 Gunn J W                   101 H   Aug 19
   6384 Gamble O J, Cor             77 A   Aug 21
   6389 Gallagher E                 48 A   Aug 21
   6897 Green J C              Cav  13 D   Aug 26
   7223 Gibson D                    56 A   Aug 29
   7320 Graham J                    56 B   Aug 30
   7340 Geary D                    184 G   Aug 30
   7357 Groves A T                  45 A   Aug 31
   7352 Glass Wm                    55 C   Aug 31 64
   7527 Griffith A                  54 F  Sept  1
   7589 Granger E H                 55 C  Sept  2
   7679 Geslin E H                   4 G  Sept  3
   7773 Giles C                      7 K  Sept  4
   7839 Gross G W, Cor              79 A  Sept  4
   8109 Galbraith C, S’t            11 K  Sept  6
   8311 Garrison W                   8 K  Sept 10
   8448 Gallagher Wm           Cav   5 F  Sept 11
   8735 Griffin J C             “    5 D  Sept 14
   9005 Gearhan S                  142 C  Sept 17
   9210 Griffin D                   11 E  Sept 19
   9326 Gilbert H                   53 F  Sept 20
   9437 Gorbay F J             Cav  19 M  Sept 21
   9503 Goodman F                   55 H  Sept 21
   9764 Grubbs J                   103 F  Sept 25
   9776 Gibson J                    11 D  Sept 26
   9792 Glenn Wm                   101 C  Sept 26
   9811 Grear R                     73 H  Sept 26
   9966 Gilbert D                  138 B  Sept 28
   9989 Garrett F                  139 G  Sept 29
  10051 Gibson D G             Cav  16 A  Sept 30
  10127 Gemperling Wm               79 A   Oct  1
  10468 Grant M                Cav  18 I   Oct  7
  10615 Griffin J                   56 A   Oct 10
  10706 Gimberling I               184 F   Oct 11
  11060 Greathouse E                14 B   Oct 17
  11197 Grabb M P                   83 H   Oct 20
  11299 Gilbert A F            Cav  14 F   Oct 20
  11496 Grant J                      6 E   Oct 26
  11573 Ganse R                     22 B   Oct 27
  11806 Gordon R                    65 F   Nov  4
  11901 Green W S                   12 I   Nov  7
  12181 Giher P                     73 H   Nov 27
  12237 George F, S’t          Cav  18 D   Dec  6
  12337 Garrety Thos               106 C   Jan  2 65
  12411 Gates J                Cav  11 E   Jan  -
  12432 Grunnell Jno                26 H   Jan 11
   5843 Gillespie J                 11 A   Aug 16 64
   5118 Gibbons Wm                  11 H   Aug  9
   6228 Gallagher T, Cor           101 A   Aug 21
   5971 Gray L, S’t                163 D   Aug 17
    423 Hanson T R                 119 E April  7
    470 Herbert Otto                73 A April  9
    555 Hoffmaster L                16 H April 14
    654 Hamilton J G, Cor      Cav   4 L April 20
    711 Hall J, (negro)              8 E April 24
    769 Hessimer P                  73 E April 27
    988 Hammons J              Art   3 A   May 10
    990 Heager J                     2 B   May 10
   1080 Huff Arthur                 54 F   May 14
   1113 Hates Chas                   2 H   May 15
   1225 Henderson R            Cav  18 D   May 20
   1311 Heckley M, S’t          “    4 M   May 23
   1420 Hill H C, S’t               18 K   May 28
   1483 Holtenstein G W         C   18 I   May 30
   1562 Henen Pat                  145 E  June  2
   1650 Hendricks N            Cav   4 D  June  5
   1768 Holmes Rob’t            “   12 H  June  9
   2011 Hannah Thos, S’t        “    4 D  June 15
   2153 Hammer P C              “   18 D  June 18
   2189 Harts Jno                   51 H  June 19
   2387 Hooks T                    103 D  June 24
   2450 Hiler H                     50 C  June 25
   2551 Hammer Jno, S’t             73 G  June 27
   2707 Howard Jas                  83 I  June 30
   2723 Henderson A                 58 F  July  1
   2786 Hollibaugh W                57 C  July  2 64
   2800 Hastings J                 118 D  July  2
   2916 Homer D, Cor           Cav  13 F  July  5
   3020 Holley E F, Cor             57 A  July  7
   3201 Harrington Jno              55 C  July 12
      2 Headley J D                 18 G   Mar 15
   3379 Height S C                  55 H  July 16
   3439 Hughes Jno                 118 A  July 17
   3525 Heenann Jno            Cav  14 F  July 18
   3554 Hazlet J                “    4 G  July 18
   3663 Hester I P                   7 H  July 18
   3626 Heth R                       2 A  July 20
   3785 Harrington J W          C    3 A  July 22
   3792 Haller Peter               139 K  July 22
   3836 Harvey P D                  57 B  July 23
   3853 Hollenbeck J A              55 B  July 24
   3920 Hall Henry                  53 H  July 25
   3953 Haller A                    73 A  July 25
   4105 Hartlick C                  99 E  July 27
   4136 Hiffefinger V               14 K  July 28
   4147 Hobbs A                    141 H  July 28
   4154 Hill P, Cor                101 B  July 28
   4222 Hoover Jno             Cav  18 E  July 29
   4332 Holland J                  143 I  July 31
   4370 Hilt Jno                    73 I  July 31
   4379 Hardinger W                147 B  July 31
   4431 Hill Thos                   18 L  July 31
   4474 Hans Jno                   116 K   Aug  1
   4790 Haffinger J                 91 C   Aug  5
   4921 Hick G                      12 G   Aug  6
   5045 Haher C                Cav  14 B   Aug  8
   5080 Hall                       149 I   Aug  8
   5082 Hunter L                    63 C   Aug  8
   5131 Hardis J L                  11 A   Aug  9
   5178 Harden M               Res   - F   Aug  9
   5281 Huffman Chas           Cav   7 K   Aug 11
   5284 Hickey D C              “    3 C   Aug 11
   5289 Hanson J                    76 B   Aug 11
   5486 Harder ——                  184 C   Aug 13
   5575 Hoffmaster G, S’t           20 F   Aug 14
   5688 Heinback S                 116 H   Aug 15
   5954 Holinbeck D                101 E   Aug 17
   6175 Honigan C                   55 C   Aug 19
   6302 Henry R W                    4 H   Aug 20
   6367 Hill J E               Cav   2 L   Aug 21
   6481 Hollingworth J,(neg)         8 A   Aug 22
   6597 Hofmaster L                 73 I   Aug 23
   6635 Hazenffiucey J         Bat  26 -   Aug 23
   6711 Hoch Jno                   103 K   Aug 24
   6752 Haden R                    119 A   Aug 24
   6792 Hogan Thos                 103 K   Aug 25
   6845 Hurling A                   57 C   Aug 25
   6910 Hammer Jno             Art   3 B   Aug 26
   7000 Hoy J                      101 F   Aug 27
   7102 Houseman G                 118 I   Aug 28
   7286 Holloman Wm                102 G   Aug 30
   7328 Hopes W                Art   2 A   Aug 30
   7422 Havert B                    52 I   Aug 31
   7491 Halliger C                  63 D  Sept  1
   7531 Hill E                     110 -  Sept  1
   7537 Henry A B                  103 E  Sept  1
   7568 Hobson B F                   7 G  Sept  2
   7571 Harman Jno                  14 H  Sept  2
   7588 Harris A               Cav   2 K  Sept  2
   7613 Homiker J                  119 H  Sept  2
   7661 Hockenbroch J          Art   2 F  Sept  3
   7661 Hughes J               Cav  11 B  Sept  3
   7682 Hoover S P                   7 H  Sept  3 64
   7687 Hunter Chas                  3 A  Sept  3
   7881 Holmes S, Cor              140 B  Sept  5
   7965 Hutton Jas                 118 I  Sept  6
   7990 Hazel Geo              Cav   2 D  Sept  6
   8254 Hacker G               Res   6 C  Sept  9
   8462 Henry O H              Cav   2 L  Sept 11
   8526 Heselport J F               68 G  Sept 12
   8532 Hopkins G R, S’t            50 K  Sept 12
   9088 Hensey ——                   90 C  Sept 18
   9118 Hooker Wm                    8 G  Sept 18
   9123 Holdhaus C                  63 E  Sept 18
   9404 Houghbough J               143 D  Sept 21
   9434 Hanks J                      1 A  Sept 21
   9433 Hartzel J                    7 I  Sept 21
   9532 Houston D                    4 B  Sept 22
   9579 Harmony J                  169 H  Sept 23
   9843 Heninshalt W               149 E  Sept 27
   9884 Hibbane J                   99 H  Sept 27
   9904 Hughly Jno                  69 D  Sept 27
  10022 Hamilton B                 183 -  Sept 29
  10070 Holden Isaac                 7 G  Sept 30
  10109 Harper R                   103 B  Sept 30
  10239 Hicks J F              Cav  14 A   Oct  2
  10349 Hammond J                   10 D   Oct  5
  10385 Hill S M                    14 D   Oct  5
  10430 Haldwell P             Cav   7 E   Oct  6
  10448 Hiller S                    64 D   Oct  7
  10474 Howe M A               Cav  12 B   Oct  7
  10538 Hand H                      58 -   Oct  8
  10571 Holden P               Cav  12 B   Oct  9
  10574 Hayes J, S’t            “   15 G   Oct  9
  10640 Hands J                    106 A   Oct 10
  10670 Hull Ed                     77 G   Oct 11
  10804 Hennessy P                  49 H   Oct 12
  10814 Hunbach J                  116 G   Oct 12
  10862 Hoberg A J             Cav   2 M   Oct 13
  10903 Hannesay A                  55 I   Oct 14
  10906 Hall A                     118 E   Oct 14
  10952 Hoover S                    79 G   Oct 14
  10962 Huffman S                   64 C   Oct 15
  11033 Happy G                    101 K   Oct 16
  11092 Harty Jas                  148 I   Oct 18
  11113 Horton S                   106 I   Oct 18
  11183 Hess G                     118 D   Oct 19
  11194 Hepsey M                    73 K   Oct 20
  11383 Hunter T               Cav   5 M   Oct 24
  11481 Hart J                       7 I   Oct 26
  11219 Hunter J               Cav  14 M   Oct 20
  11495 Hardinwick J                 2 C   Oct 26
  11609 Hosaflock H A          Cav   6 E   Oct 28
  11643 Hacket J                    30 D   Oct 30
  11702 Hoover J                    90 A   Oct 31
  11799 Hagerty W R                  7 G   Nov  4
  11897 Hart M                      11 K   Nov  7
  12215 Hyatt J F                  118 F   Dec  3
  12260 Healy J B                  100 M   Dec 11
  12306 Hammond W                   20 K   Dec 18
  12610 Heneman E L                  5 C   Feb  7 65
  12632 Healey J, Cor              143 K   Feb 10
  12719 Hummell J                   87 B   Mar  2
   7020 Hazen M J                  101 H   Aug 22 64
   3474 Hall B                     105 F  July 17
  10227 Haman I                    118 E   Oct  1
    124 Isheart N              Cav  18 G   Mar 23
   1401 Illy Tobias                 27 C   May 27
  10405 Irvin T, S’t           Cav  15 M   Oct  8
  10616 Ireton S R                 138 I   Oct 10 64
  11560 Irwin W                    184 A   Oct 27
    831 Ingersoll Sam                3 D   May  1
    233 Johnson Jno J               45 I   Mar 29
    463 Johnson Chas                90 C April  9
    565 Johnson Jno            Cav   2 G April 15
    576 Jacobs Jacob            “    2 M April  9
   1303 Jones Wm                   145 A   May 23
   1595 Jones J                    147 C  June  3
   1840 Jones Wm                    26 C  June 11
   2108 Jones O                Cav   4 D  June 17
   2312 Johnston Wm            Art   3 A  June 22
   2593 Jones R                    103 D  June 28
   2914 Jordan D W                 103 B  July  5
   3499 Johnson D                   45 I  July 18
   3510 Jennings H                  45 G  July 18
   3885 Jones Wm                    55 C  July 24
   4057 John Thomas                 54 E  July 27
   4093 Jones J                     79 A  July 27
   4540 Johnson J W                 50 G   Aug  2
   4590 Jameson Wm                 103 H   Aug  3
   4817 Johns Rob’t                101 I   Aug  5
   5295 Johnson H              Art   2 I   Aug 11
   5516 Jacobs B G                 150 F   Aug 13
   5871 Jones Rob’t                100 A   Aug 16
   6197 Jones T                    101 I   Aug 19
   6200 Jones W E                   27 B   Aug 19
   6317 Jones S                     49 G   Aug 22
   6760 Joslin J                   145 I   Aug 25
   6817 Jober J                     77 B   Aug 25
   6931 Jarmter C                    7 A   Aug 26
   7566 Johnson Chas                53 G  Sept  2
   8318 Johnson J                   45 I  Sept 10
   8853 Jolly Jas                  101 H  Sept 15
   9303 Jones P                     63 F  Sept 20
   9351 Jordan J M                 149 D  Sept 20
   9378 Jacobs J S             Cav   6 F  Sept 20
   9982 Jeffries C                   4 B  Sept 29
   9999 Jones T                    101 B  Sept 29
  10735 Jabin Jas                   55 E   Oct 11
  10987 Jones A                     27 D   Oct 16
  11058 Johnson Wm                 184 D   Oct 17
  11430 Jordan Thos                148 -   Oct 24
  11539 Jenks J C                  115 H   Oct 27
  12007 Johnson L                  118 C   Nov  4
  12331 Jack J P                     7 E   Dec 24
   2889 Johnson A G, Cor           103 I  July  4
      2 Kelly Chas H                71 H   Mch  1
    238 Kelly H S, S’t         Cav  13 H   Mar 30
    266 Kuntzelman J                63 E   Mar 31
   1024 Kenny Wm                    12 F   May 11
   1824 Kyle Wm                      5 H  June 10
   1875 Kelly Peter                 73 -  June 12
   2076 Knight Jno             Cav   7 K  June 17
   2335 Kehoe Moses                  8 H  June 22
   2639 Kenoan M A             Cav  14 L  June 29
   3048 King C                       6 C  July  8
   3187 Kiech N, Cor                54 A  July 12
   3265 Klink A                    101 C  July 13
   3471 Kemp E                     103 A  July 17
   3634 Keeston E                  103 I  July 20
   4162 Kagman J T                  45 B  July 28
   4293 Kuffman S D                 45 E  July 30
   4545 Kauf J                 Art   2 B   Aug  2
   4895 Kelley O F                 148 B   Aug  6
   5058 Kock H                      21 H   Aug  8
   5145 Kawell Jno             Cav  18 E   Aug  9
   5154 Keyes Alex C, Cor      Cav  16 H   Aug  9 64
   5208 Kester L                   149 F   Aug 10
   5443 Kelley T               Cav  13 H   Aug 12
   5851 Kahn R                      96 K   Aug 13
   5718 Keister Jno M              103 A   Aug 15
   5744 Keeley Wm              Cav  13 A   Aug 15
   6028 Kauffman B F                45 K   Aug 18
   6084 Kemper J                    73 D   Aug 18
   6459 Kiger Wm               Cav   3 C   Aug 22
   6497 Kenter A W                  67 B   Aug 22
   6514 Kniver S                   184 F   Aug 22
   6638 Krigle H                    11 K   Aug 23
   6965 Krader W O                  55 H   Aug 27
   7005 King M                 Cav   3 A   Aug 27
   7372 Keller A                     9 M   Aug 31
   7553 Keller M                   105 G  Sept  1
   7781 Kyle Wm                    118 F  Sept  7
   8210 Kinsman F P                184 F  Sept  8
   8734 Kanford Jno C, S m      C    5 -  Sept 14
   8799 Kaufman J                   45 E  Sept 17
   9139 Kipp W                 Cav  12 D  Sept 18
   9563 Kinmick T, Cor             145 K  Sept 23
   9630 Kearney L                   50 F  Sept 24
  10335 Kerr B                     149 B   Oct  4
  10367 Kirby J A                  101 E   Oct  5
  10439 Kline Ross                 184 F   Oct  6
  10502 Kennedy J                  152 A   Oct  8
  10698 King M                      11 K   Oct 11
  10747 Kirkwood H                 101 C   Oct 11
  10926 Knieper C                   89 F   Oct 14
  11238 Kurtz J                     55 K   Oct 21
  11332 King J R                    55 K   Oct 23
  11384 Kelley E               Cav   7 F   Oct 24
  11463 King R                       6 E   Oct 26
  11645 Kramer Geo, Cor            116 G   Oct 30
  12695 Knox J, S’t                184 A   Feb 23 65
   8676 Kerer H N                   63 E  July 20 64
     88 Liesen Lewis           Cav  13 A   Mch 21
    243 Lancaster E             “   14 F   Mch 30
    297 Luck W                  “   11 H April  1
    549 Lynch Adam              “    6 L April 14
   1403 Levy Frank              “    3 H   May 27
   1429 Liesine Wm, Cor             13 E   May 28
   1579 Lindine J              Art   3 A  June  3
   1588 Little M                   106 F  June  3
   1621 Luhaus Melter              145 A  June  4
   2250 Lackey Jas                 183 D  June 21
   2379 Leach J                Cav   3 D  June 23
   3091 Larimer J                   11 E  July  9
   3734 Ladbeater Jas                7 K  July 21
   3305 Link P                      98 H  July 14
   3306 Long A                     118 H  July 14
   3369 Lanigan N, S’t         Cav  13 L  July 15
   3403 Lewis Ed                   101 I  July 16
   3448 Leonard Geo                 49 G  July 17
   3489 Logan B                     90 B  July 17
   3545 Lee Jas                Cav  13 B  July 18
   4312 Long D F B                 101 I  July 30
   4434 Lambert W              Cav   4 K  July 31
   4696 Larrison Wallace        C   14 C   Aug  4
   4818 Lewis A                Cav   3 D   Aug  5
   4857 Laughlin J, S’t            101 E   Aug  6
   4907 Lahman C                    73 C   Aug  6
   4929 Livingston J K               2 B   Aug  6
   5199 Long Augustus               55 H   Aug 10
   5225 Loudin H N                  14 H   Aug 10
   5314 Lacock Hugh                116 E   Aug 11
   6252 Lodiss H                    90 A   Aug 20 64
   6636 Leach Jas                   49 E   Aug 23
   6783 Light S, Cor               143 H   Aug 25
   7145 LaBelt J                    21 F   Aug 29
   7938 Lemon Jno E            Cav   4 I  Sept  6
   7950 Lockhard J                 145 B  Sept  8
   8405 Lepley Chas                103 E  Sept 10
   8754 Layman F                    49 B  Sept 10
   8833 Laughlin J L                 1 H  Sept 15
   8895 Lester W H             Cav   7 I  Sept 16
   8904 Lippoth J                    5 E  Sept 16
   9085 Logne S                     26 A  Sept 18
   9291 Leary C                     83 K  Sept 19
   9647 Loden J                Cav   4 C  Sept 24
  10066 Laytin P                   110 D  Sept 30
  10086 Lutz P M                    21 G  Sept 30
  10091 Lebos C                    116 D  Sept 30
  10273 Limar W                    140 -   Oct  3
  10298 Long W                      67 G   Oct  4
  10372 Long P, Cor            Cav  11 C   Oct  5
  10548 Lancaster C                119 B   Oct  8
  10572 Lynch W J              Cav   3 I   Oct  9
  10580 Labor R                      7 F   Oct 10
  10687 Luchford R                 143 F   Oct 11
  10873 Lang I                     110 C   Oct 13
  11604 Leuchlier J                  5 -   Oct 16
  11255 Lantz Wm                     7 C   Oct 21
  11465 Lewis J                Cav   4 L   Oct 26
  11728 Luther I                “    4 L   Nov  1
  11869 Lego Geo                    12 A   Nov  6
  11907 Ladd A                      53 M   Nov  7
  12192 Lape J                      18 K   Nov 28
  12210 Lewis D S                   53 K   Dec  2
  12489 Linsey D                    77 G   Jan 19 65
   5699 Ledwick F M                139 C   Aug 15 64
   7084 Latchem David          Cav   4 K   Aug 28
   7307 Lochery A               “   14 E   Aug 30
   5985 Logan W                     97 A   Aug 17
   6030 Loudon S                   101 A   Aug 18
   6053 Layton Samuel              181 A   Aug 18
   6071 Lamb C                      71 B   Aug 18
   6082 Lane Amos              Cav   6 E   Aug 18
   6152 Lehnich Jno            Art   2 F   Aug 19
    753 Lenard M               Cav  13 D April 26
    761 Lord G W                   141 E April 27
    871 Loudon Samuel, Cor           2 F   May  4
    183 Maynard Jno                105 G   Mar 27
    208 Missile Val                 47 C   Mar 28
    225 Miller Daniel          Cav  13 H   Mar 29
    361 Martin J F              “   14 K April  2
    461 McEntire W                  51 F April  9
    538 Mine Josh, Cor              54 F April 14
    586 Marple S L                  14 A April 17
    605 McKissick Jno               23 F April 18
    667 Myers G                Cav   1 E April 22
    736 McKeever E L, S’t           71 F April 25
    773 McDonald R                  23 C April 28
    780 McCarthy Jas           Cav  18 E April 28
    969 McQueeny W                  79 B   May  9
   1006 Meyer Jno              Cav   2 E   May 10
   1128 McKey J                 “    1 I   May 15
   1139 McMahon J                   73 F   May 16
   1147 McKnight J E                57 B   May 16
   1151 McHale J               Cav  14 D   May 16
   1185 Moser Jno               “   13 B   May 18
   1273 McCollen W, S’t         “    4 L   May 22
   1287 Milligan J                  61 F   May 22
   1308 McCartney M                 73 B   May 23 64
   1460 Murray Jno             Cav  13 E   May 29
   1586 Miles Lewis             “    4 I  June  3
   1643 Myers J R, Cor          “   13 M  June  5
   1722 Marshall M M                78 E  June  8
   1748 Moyer Thos                 103 E  June  9
   1792 Miller M                   118 A  June 10
   1858 McHose J               Cav   4 A  June 12
   1907 Miller Henry                 8 G  June 13
   1982 Muchollans J               101 K  June 15
   2056 Monny W H              Cav   3 A  June 16
   2058 Matchell J J               101 K  June 16
   2159 Monan J                    101 C  June 19
   2265 McCutchen J            Cav   4 C  June 21
   2278 Milton Wm               “   19 H  June 21
   2333 Myers F, S’t                27 H  June 22
   2364 Myers Peter                 76 G  June 23
   2388 Morton T                    79 I  June 24
   2409 McCabe J               Cav   3 L  June 24
   2411 McKay M J                  103 B  June 24
   2493 Merry Jas                   67 E  June 26
   2503 Martin A J, Cor        Cav   4 E  June 26
   2508 Morris J                “   18 A  June 26
   2653 McManes ——                  77 B  June 29
   2684 Mipes J                    101 B  June 30
   2690 Morris G                    77 G  June 30
   2798 Marsh D                     50 D  July  2
   2831 McCane Chas                 14 C  July  3
   3017 McRath J                    48 C  July  7
   3065 Morris Calvin               53 D  July  9
   3133 McCalasky J E, S’t     Cav   4 K  July 10
   3151 Mattiser B                  57 F  July 11
   3172 Madden Daniel              149 G  July 11
   3250 Myers M                    103 E  July 13
   3374 Mink H                 Art   3 A  July 16
   3467 Meaker E N                 155 H  July 17
   3481 McKeon Jno                 101 H  July 17
   3488 Mihan J                    138 D  July 17
   3939 Maroney Jno            Cav   1 D  July 20
   3690 McCarron J             Cav   4 A  July 21
   3766 Myers Jno                  116 D  July 22
   3971 Martin G                    45 I  July 25
   4016 McDermott J M               70 F  July 26
   4123 McGee Jas                  103 I  July 28
   4197 Moore M G              Art   1 A  July 29
   4341 Marquet M                    6 M  July 30
   4407 McKever Jno                100 A  July 31
   4414 McFarland Jas               55 E  July 31
   4546 Moan Jas                   101 K   Aug  2
   4607 Martin Bryant                7 F   Aug  3
   4635 McKeral Jas                 14 K   Aug  3
   4710 Mathews C W, Cor           145 B   Aug  4
   4734 Moore                       71 I   Aug  4
   4796 McDevitt J             Art   3 D   Aug  5
   4824 Miller H               Cav  14 I   Aug  5
   4876 Mills Wm                   150 G   Aug  6
   4898 Muldany M                   96 K   Aug  6
   5068 Martain Jno                103 E   Aug  8
   5069 Measler Jas                103 E   Aug  8
   5139 McCaffrey Jno, h s     Art   3 A   Aug  9
   5159 Martin C               Cav   8 A   Aug  9
   5266 Marey H F                  103 F   Aug 10
   5291 Mohr J R                    14 G   Aug 11
   5415 McCarty Dennis             101 K   Aug 12
   5433 McGee J                     14 H   Aug 12
   5595 Mickelson B            Cav  16 B   Aug 14
   5642 McClough L C                18 C   Aug 14
   5704 Miller Jno                 101 G   Aug 15 64
   5723 McCann Jno             Art   3 A   Aug 15
   5781 Miller S                   143 B   Aug 15
   5809 Montgomery R                62 A   Aug 16
   5868 McQuillen A            Art   6 L   Aug 16
   5893 McCuller S             Cav   4 B   Aug 16
   5926 Mulchey J A                 50 D   Aug 17
   5988 Mann Jas, Cor              119 G   Aug 17
   6014 McPherson D                103 F   Aug 17
   6038 Moore C                    103 G   Aug 18
   6148 McCracker J                 53 K   Aug 19
   6294 McLaughlin Jas          C    4 A   Aug 20
   6441 McWilliams H                82 I   Aug 22
   5480 Martin Jno                 103 D   Aug 22
   6532 McGan J                Cav  18 -   Aug 23
   6664 McKee ——                   144 C   Aug 24
   6689 Manner M                    73 K   Aug 24
   6910 McGlann H                  143 B   Aug 26
   6925 McGuigan H C                 7 K   Aug 26
   7026 Marks P                    143 B   Aug 27
   7061 Moore M J                  107 -   Aug 28
   7107 Moyer Wm H                  55 H   Aug 28
   7119 Miller Jno L                53 K   Aug 28
   7127 McAffee Jas                 72 F   Aug 28
   7175 Moore Thos                  69 D   Aug 29
   7263 Martin Jno                  77 C   Aug 30
   7265 Musser Jno                  77 D   Aug 30
   7305 Moser S                    103 E   Aug 30
   7333 Morris Jno                 183 G   Aug 30
   7407 Marchin Wm                  50 E   Aug 31
   7512 Millinger Jno H              7 C  Sept  1
   7602 Moorhead J S               103 D  Sept  2
   7719 Myers H                      9 A  Sept  3
   7875 Mayer W                      8 M  Sept  5
   7925 Mays N J                   103 H  Sept  5
   8027 Murphy A               Cav  13 I  Sept  6
   8047 McKnight J             Cav  18 I  Sept  6
   8122 Miller J, Cor              101 C  Sept  8
   8123 Mullings W                 145 G  Sept  8
   8128 Munager W              Cav  13 L  Sept  8
   8134 Mehaffey J M           Cav  16 B  Sept  8
   8153 McCantley W            Art   2 A  Sept  8
   8158 McLane T                    12 E  Sept  8
   8194 McKink J, Cor              119 D  Sept  8
   8216 Mansfield J                101 G  Sept  8
   8322 Myers A                    118 I  Sept 10
   8469 Magill H                   103 I  Sept 11
   8596 Morrison J                 146 E  Sept 12
   8627 McKinney D                  90 C  Sept 13
   8691 Moritze A                  118 D  Sept 14
   8802 McCullogh ——               101 E  Sept 15
   9071 Maynard A              Art   3 -  Sept 17
   9090 McCall Wm              Cav  22 B  Sept 18
   9228 McCullough S               138 K  Sept 19
   9270 Mayhan F               Cav  20 -  Sept 19
   9315 Marsh W                    149 K  Sept 20
   9339 Meyers J A                 138 C  Sept 20
   9526 McQuigley Jno              101 C  Sept 22
   9583 Mead H J                   184 B  Sept 23
   9598 Martin J               Cav  17 C  Sept 23
   9644 Morris J                    54 I  Sept 24
   9646 Morgan J E                   2 A  Sept 24
   9651 McCook B                   118 A  Sept 24
   9761 McMurray Wm             C    1 I  Sept 25
   9871 Mason Jno                  112 A  Sept 27
   4578 McKerner S                  73 E   Aug  2
  10050 Mesin Jas, S’t              90 F  Sept 30
  10060 Morgan C                    45 A  Sept 30 64
  10119 McClany J                  101 C   Oct  1
  10154 McElroy Wm             Cav  13 L   Oct  1
  10306 Meese J                     48 A   Oct  4
  10396 McGraw Jno             Art   3 A   Oct  6
  10407 Miller H                    79 K   Oct  6
  10486 Miller Wash’gton        C   18 C   Oct  7
  10610 McKearney J W              118 K   Oct 10
  10620 McClief Wm                   7 A   Oct 10
  10641 Marker W H                 118 D   Oct 10
  10678 Martin J P                   7 I   Oct 11
  10684 Miller Jas                   7 I   Oct 11
  10803 Mattis Aaron               138 -   Oct 12
  10825 Moore C H              Cav  13 C   Oct 13
  10929 Martin Geo H               108 I   Oct 14
  10981 Maxwell S              Cav  14 B   Oct 15
  10991 Moses W                 “   16 H   Oct 16
  10993 McKnight Jas               118 K   Oct 16
  11081 Mitchell J O                55 H   Oct 18
  11142 Mansfield Geo              101 I   Oct 19
  11229 McClay J H             Cav  11 D   Oct 20
  11305 McBride ——              “    2 H   Oct 22
  11326 Marshall L                 184 A   Oct 23
  11387 Moore S                    101 F   Oct 24
  11459 Moore J                Cav  13 B   Oct 25
  11464 McNelse J H, Cor           100 E  Sept 26
  11542 Miller F                    54 K   Oct 27
  11655 Midz J                 Cav  20 A   Oct 30
  11658 Menk W                  “   12 F   Oct 30
  11683 Morrow J C, S’t Maj        101 E  Oct 31
  11684 McCann J               Cav  11 L   Oct 31
  11686 Moore W                    184 B   Oct 31
  11692 Mulligan J                   7 H   Oct 31
  11909 McCune J                    67 E   Nov  8
  11913 McClush N                   97 E   Nov  8
  11982 Manee M                     53 H   Nov 13
  12008 McCray J                   145 A   Nov 14
  12088 Maher D                    118 E   Nov 18
  12103 Miller W                    31 I   Nov 22
  12248 Murray W               Cav  14 H   Dec  8
  12326 McIntire J                  55 C   Dec 24
  12334 Myers A D                   52 A   Dec 26
  12554 Matthews J             Cav   6 F   Jan 30 65
  12595 Maloy J M                  184 D   Feb  5
  12625 McGenger J                  20 C   Feb  9
  12696 Myers H                     87 E   Feb 23
  12771 McDonald ——                  9 G   Mar 13
  12806 McGarrett R W              103 F   Feb 21
   1134 Nicholson Jno          Cav   3 H   May 16 64
   1298 Nelson Wm                   76 H   May 23
   2832 Nolti Wm                     6 F  July  3
   3653 Newell G S                 183 A  July 20
   4246 Nicholson W            Cav   1 H  July 29
   4489 Nelson Geo                   2 K   Aug  1
   4936 Naylor G W, S’t        Cav  13 L   Aug  7
   5109 Nichols D A                125 D   Aug  9
   6001 Neal H G                    90 B   Aug 17
   6011 Nickle C                    37 G   Aug 17
   6702 Nickem Jas                  77 G   Aug 24
   8154 Naylor S               Cav  20 H  Sept  8
   8907 Noble J                     73 D  Sept 16
   9424 Nice Isaac                  11 L  Sept 21
   9468 Neff J                 Cav   4 D  Sept 21
  10146 Nelson G                    55 A   Oct  1
  10286 Nelson J A                 145 G   Oct  4
  10764 Newberry Jno           Cav  20 A   Oct 12
  11107 Nelson A                   160 E   Oct 18
  11254 Noble Thos             Cav  19 G   Oct 21 64
  11776 Nichols G                   20 C   Nov  3
    414 Osbourne S K                 4 K April  7
    622 Oglesby J              Cav   4 K April 19
   1318 O’Brien P                   13 A   May 23
   1409 Ottinger I             Cav   8 I   May 27
   1817 O’Neil Jno, S’t             69 -  June 12
   2589 Oswald Stephen              55 G  June 28
   3161 O’Conor ——                  83 -  July 11
   3199 O’Neil J                    63 I  July 12
   3704 Olmar H, S’t           Cav   2 H  July 21
   3861 O’Connor H                  49 E  July 24
   4161 Owens G H                    7 A  July 28
   5119 Offlebach Z                 90 K   Aug  9
   5184 Oliver W                   103 D   Aug  9
   5939 O’Hara M                   101 E   Aug 17
   6254 O’Connell Wm               183 G   Aug 20
   6535 O’Hara Jno                 150 E   Aug 23
   6658 Oiler Sam                  103 G   Aug 24
   6908 O’Rourke Chas              109 C   Aug 26
   7105 Otto Jno               Cav   5 B   Aug 28
   9330 Owens E                     50 D   Sep 20
  10805 Osborn E, Cor          Cav  11 A   Oct 13
     30 Peck Albert                 57 K   Mar  9
     62 Patterson Rob          Res   2 E   Mar 18
    125 Parker Jas M, Cor           76 B   Mar 23
    500 Petrisky H                  54 F April 12
   1110 Patterson T            Cav   3 A   May 15
   1119 Patent Thos                 73 G   May 15
   1258 Powell Wm              Cav  14 D   May 21
   1556 Powers Jno                  26 I  June  2
   1780 Preso Thos                  26 E  June  9
   1884 Powell Frank                18 -  June 12
   2566 Page J                     183 G  June 27
   2590 Porter David               101 H  June 28
   2903 Parsons J T                103 D  July  5
   3197 Painter J G                 26 F  July 11
   3445 Painter S                   63 A  July 17
   4049 Patterson R                101 H  July 27
   4157 Pickett J C            Cav   3 A  July 28
   4177 Pratt F                 “   14 I  July 28
   4191 Plymeer W               “   20 B  July 28
   4415 Page Jno                   112 A  July 31
   4473 Powell H                   102 H   Aug  1
   5323 Prosser J                   63 -   Aug 11
   5579 Pyers Isaac                 72 G   Aug 14
   5610 Phillips Jas B             101 I   Aug 14
   5947 Parish J A                 184 -   Aug 17
   6341 Preans H                   149 K   Aug 21
   6439 Palmer H                   140 D   Aug 22
   6527 Poole G                     52 B   Aug 22
   6536 Pifer M                     13 G   Aug 23
   6574 Phillips J W           Cav   1 F   Aug 23
   6843 Peterson G                 103 D   Aug 25
   6844 Penn Jno               Cav   5 E   Aug 25
   6885 Patten H W             Art   2 F   Aug 26
   7118 Potts Edw                  183 H   Aug 28
   7232 Perkins N                  103 D   Aug 29
   8030 Powell A T                 149 C  Sept  6
   8160 Pricht F                    87 H  Sept  8
   8763 Peck C W                   145 H  Sept 14
   8877 Persil Frederick           101 -  Sept 15
   9220 Palmer A                   143 D  Sept 19
   9684 Perego W                   143 G  Sept 24
   9754 Phipps J H                  57 E  Sept 26
  10074 Price G                    106 H  Sept 30
  10573 Penstock A                 144 B   Oct  9
  10858 Powell I                   101 I   Oct 13 64
  11168 Price O                    109 C   Oct 19
  11261 Phay M                      69 C   Oct 21
  11637 Phillips F                  61 K   Oct 28
  11737 Pees M T                   145 H   Nov  2
  11833 Penn J                 Cav  18 I   Nov  6
  11918 Phelps W                “    4 G   Nov  8
  11328 Porterfield J K         “    5 M   Oct 23
  12075 Pencer W                    18 C   Nov 18
  12191 Pryor Wm                    11 C   Nov 28
  12359 Poleman H              Cav   1 F   Dec 30
  12378 Perry H                    121 C   Jan  2 65
  12388 Pritchett J                 72 C   Jan  8
  12479 Potter B F                 148 I   Jan 17
   6756 Quinby L C                  76 E   Aug 24 64
     47 Reed Sam               Cav   4 D   Mar 15
    126 Robertson J                119 K   Mar 23
    132 Rosenburg Henry             49 G   Mar 24
    171 Reign Jno                   83 K   Mar 26
    308 Richpeder A                 13 B April  2
    610 Ray Wm                 Cav   8 F April 18
    847 Rhinehart J             “    3 D   May  3
    895 Russell F                    4 D   May  3
    907 Rhinebolt J            Cav  18 I   May  5
    940 Robinson C W, S’t          150 E   May  7
   1152 Randall H              Cav   4 H   May 16
   1218 Rigney Chas             “    4 G   May 19
   1454 Raleigh A                   51 G   May 29
   1485 Rudolph S, Cor         Cav  13 K   May 30
   1599 Rhine Geo                   63 I  June  4
   1624 Rosenburg H            Cav  13 H  June  4
   1719 Raymond Jno, S’t        “   18 H  June  8
   1803 Rheems A, S’t               73 I  June 10
   1833 Ramsay J D                 103 F  June 11
   1922 Rush S                      18 G  June 14
   1942 Robinson Wm                 77 D  June 14
   2225 Roush Peter                101 E  June 20
   2528 Rupert F               Cav   2 H  June 26
   2602 Roat J                      54 F  June 28
   2735 Rhoades F                   79 E  July  1
   2911 Rock J E                     5 M  July  5
   2979 Regart Jno             Cav  13 E  July  7
   2103 Ray A, S’t                  77 E  July 17
   3024 Rugh M J                   103 D  July  7
   3270 Robins R                    69 B  July 13
   3468 Ransom H                   148 I  July 17
   3827 Rinner L               Cav   5 A  July 23
   4074 Ringwalk J F                79 H  July 27
   4241 Roger L                    115 L  July 29
   4309 Rogers C                    73 C  July 30
   4476 Ray Jas R                  184 B   Aug  1
   4507 Riese S                    103 D   Aug  1
   4844 Richie Jas                 103 B   Aug  6
   4940 Ruthfer J              Art   2 F   Aug  7
   5319 Rice Sam’l                 101 K   Aug 11
   5389 Ross David                 103 B   Aug 12
   5430 Robinson John               99 D   Aug 12
   5537 Rose B                      13 I   Aug 13
   5800 Robins J               Cav   2 M   Aug 15
   5879 Rider H                 “    7 L   Aug 16
   5894 Richards E                 143 E   Aug 16
   5912 Reese Jacob                103 B   Aug 17
   5940 Richards Jno, Cor      Cav   1 G   Aug 17
   6321 Robbins G                  106 G   Aug 21
   6373 Roger Jno L                110 H   Aug 21
   6520 Reynolds J                  14 H   Aug 22
   6725 Rowe E, Cor                103 A   Aug 24
   6777 Rangardener J              149 H   Aug 25 64
   6789 Richards G             Cav  13 A   Aug 25
   6790 Runels Jno              “    6 L   Aug 25
   6822 Rum A                      188 C   Aug 25
   6838 Reese D                    148 K   Aug 25
   6896 Raiff T                      1 A   Aug 26
   6933 Richardson ——               61 -   Aug 26
   7067 Reese D                    143 F   Aug 28
   7202 Ruff J                     103 F   Aug 29
   7292 Redmire H                   98 B   Aug 30
   7293 Robins Geo                  62 A   Aug 30
   7410 Richardson H               103 K   Aug 31
   7467 Richard D              Cav  18 D  Sept  1
   7716 Rice E                       7 B  Sept  3
   7738 Roads Frederick            101 E  Sept  3
   8139 Rathburn K                   2 F  Sept  8
   8540 Russell S A, Cor            79 A  Sept 12
   8545 Ray A                      149 D  Sept 12
   8602 Richards J                 106 H  Sept 12
   8635 Rhangmen G, S’t            138 D  Sept 13
   8742 Root D                      48 B  Sept 14
   9019 Ret Geo                     18 A  Sept 17
   9272 Ramsay J I                 149 -  Sept 19
   9585 Richie H                    11 F  Sept 23
   9599 Renamer W H                 87 H  Sept 23
   9612 Richards Jno               113 D  Sept 23
   9653 Reed R                     103 A  Sept 24
   9766 Ramsay R                    84 D  Sept 25
   9882 Richards J                  53 K  Sept 27
  10174 Reed J                      55 A   Oct  1
  10863 Ramsay Wm                   87 B   Oct 13
  10622 Reedy E T, S’t              87 B   Oct 10
  10935 Roundabush H B              51 A   Oct 14
  10947 Rockwell A             Cav   2 L   Oct 14
  11071 Raeff J B                   72 E   Oct 17
  11115 Rinkle Jno A                20 A   Oct 18
  11293 Rolston J                   18 F   Oct 22
  11147 Rudy J                      13 F   Oct 19
  11444 Riffle S G, Cor            189 C   Oct 25
  11566 Richardson A               144 E   Oct 27
  11868 Rowland N                  111 F   Nov  6
  12008 Rapp A E               Cav  18 I   Nov 15
  12048 Ruth B S                    23 I   Nov 16
  12206 Rothe C                    101 A   Dec  1
  12355 Reese D                      7 A   Dec 29
  12372 Reed W S                   128 H   Jan  1 65
    377 Smith M D                   18 B April  5 64
    788 Smith Geo              Cav   5 H April 28
    881 Smith Wm                     4 A   May  4
    882 Smith T                     19 G   May  4
    921 Steffler W J, S’t      Cav  12 G   May  6
   1014 Serend H                “    4 D   May 10
   1030 Shebert Gotlieb             73 C   May 11
   1058 Spilyfiter A                54 F   May 13
   1105 Sullivan D                 101 K   May 15
   1114 Shindle S R, S’t           140 K   May 15
   1155 Stearnes E K           Cav  14 A   May 16
   1169 Sloat D                     76 I   May 16
   1175 Scott Wm                     4 B   May 16
   1216 Severn C                   139 A   May 19
   1256 Sammoris B, S’t        Cav   2 B   May 21
   1349 Smith Chas                  26 A   May 24
   1453 Schlenbough C          Cav   4 G   May 29
   1503 Smith Martin            “   18 H   May 31
   1535 Stone Samuel                26 F  June  1
   1543 Shoemaker M, S’t       Cav  13 H  June  1
   1605 Swearer G                   13 H  June  4
   1620 Schiefeit Jacob             54 F  June  4 64
   1632 Schmar R                    45 F  June  5
   1963 Smith D                Cav  11 H  June 14
   2039 Slough H                    53 -  June 15
   2070 Stevens A              Cav  13 M  June 16
   2121 Sherwood C H, S’t       “    4 M  June 17
   2123 Stall Sam’l                 75 D  June 17
   2126 Say J R                Cav   4 K  June 17
   2163 Steele J S              “    7 F  June 19
   2259 Scoles M                    27 K  June 21
   2331 Sims B                 Cav  14 G  June 22
   2412 Shop Jacob                   2 M  June 24
   2622 Springer Jno               101 E  June 28
   2650 Stewart J B                103 A  June 29
   2725 Scott Allen                150 H  July  1
   2738 Schimgert J                 73 G  July  1
   2791 Shimer J A             Cav  13 A  July  2
   2864 Scott Wm, (negro)            8 D  July  4
   2905 Stump A                     11 I  July  5
   2941 Smith Jacob                 51 H  July  6
   2982 Shaw W                     140 B  July  7
   2999 Smulley Jno                112 K  July  7
   3057 Sutton R M                 103 I  July  9
   3113 Sweet H                     57 K  July 10
   3136 Shoemaker M                148 G  July 10
   3154 Sillers Wm                  77 D  July 11
   3214 Stone W F                   53 G  July 12
   3480 Swelser J                  103 D  July 17
   3567 Smalley L                   58 K  July 19
   3568 Stevens S G                150 H  July 19
   3586 Sickles Daniel             116 K  July 19
   3632 Serders J S                142 K  July 20
   3670 Stopper Wm                  16 B  July 20
   3763 Stillenberger F            172 F  July 22
   3775 Strance D                   11 H  July 22
   3855 Smith J                     79 F  July 24
   3906 Smith O C                   77 G  July 24
   3956 Seilk A                    144 D  July 25
   3960 Sullivan T                  77 F  July 25
   4006 Smith F                     64 K  July 26
   4009 Shafer J H                  84 E  July 26
   4012 Shapley Geo                103 G  July 26
   4043 Strickley C                 53 H  July 27
   4064 Shriveley E S          Cav  19 M  July 27
   4113 Sheppard E                 145 G  July 28
   4164 Smith S W                  101 B  July 28
   4213 Shaffer Peter               52 F  July 29
   4223 Shister F              Cav   3 A  July 29
   4228 Stein J                      7 G  July 29
   4274 Sloan J                     11 E  July 29
   4285 Shone P                Cav   4 D  July 30
   4345 Stobbs W W, Cor            101 E  July 30
   4348 Scott A                     22 F  July 31
   4351 Scundler J                  67 A  July 31
   4372 Smith P                     72 C  July 31
   4566 Sale Thos                   15 M   Aug  2
   4775 Shink Jas                   81 F   Aug  5
   4791 Sullivan Ed                 67 H   Aug  5
   4797 Sear C                 Cav  14 L   Aug  5
   4845 Shember Jno             “   11 D   Aug  6
   4928 Slicker J                   77 D   Aug  6
   4931 Sheit P                     61 G   Aug  7
   4945 Swartz P, Cor               27 I   Aug  7
   5160 Stiner Jno             Cav  22 G   Aug  9
   5189 Striker F               “   14 C   Aug  9
   5215 Sworeland Wm               184 A   Aug 10
   5232 Speck A                    118 A   Aug 10
   5411 Shaffer Daniel         Cav  13 F   Aug 12 64
   5529 Spangrost A                103 D   Aug 12
   5437 Shears J S                 149 K   Aug 12
   5463 Stibbs W                    56 H   Aug 13
   5494 Shape F                Cav  18 A   Aug 13
   5603 Somerfield W                69 E   Aug 14
   5700 Stinebach A                150 C   Aug 15
   5750 Spears W M, S’t        Cav   2 K   Aug 15
   5874 Sheppard N                  79 F   Aug 16
   5965 Shultz F               Cav  13 K   Aug 17
   6205 Shoop G                    103 K   Aug 19
   6289 Smith H                     26 K   Aug 20
   6337 Smith W                Cav  18 B   Aug 21
   6382 Swager M                   101 F   Aug 21
   6436 Spain Thos                 118 H   Aug 22
   6523 Stover J                    49 F   Aug 22
   6526 Stahler S                  149 G   Aug 22
   6534 Snyder Jno                 118 C   Aug 23
   6584 Sloate E                    50 D   Aug 23
   6595 Shirley Henry              105 I   Aug 23
   6669 Sherwood P                  84 I   Aug 24
   6776 Shellito R                 150 C   Aug 25
   6823 Spain Richard              118 H   Aug 25
   6829 Sturgess W A, Cor           79 G   Aug 25
   6880 Stuler D               Cav   4 A   Aug 26
   7029 Strickler J W               11 F   Aug 27
   7106 Smith Jno F                 55 C   Aug 28
   7137 Sloan J M              Cav  18 D   Aug 28
   7141 Springer J                 113 F   Aug 29
   7262 Shriver B              Cav  18 K   Aug 30
   7302 Singer J               Art   2 A   Aug 30
   7358 Scoleton J                  53 F   Aug 31
   7363 Sweeney D              Cav  14 E   Aug 31
   7379 Scott W B               “    4 D   Aug 31
   7631 Streetman J                  7 E  Sept  2
   7638 Steele J                    62 M  Sept  2
   7648 Spencer Geo                 20 C  Sept  3
   7662 Snyder M S                 183 A  Sept  3
   7705 Swartz Geo             Cav   5 A  Sept  3
   7770 Stockhouse D, Cor       “   18 I  Sept  4
   7905 Sellers H                  149 G  Sept  5
   7939 Shultz Jno             Cav   4 I  Sept  5
   7960 Smith A C                    7 F  Sept  6
   8038 Simpson T                   53 K  Sept  6
   8103 Stump J                    105 I  Sept  7
   8112 Slade E, Cor               150 H  Sept  7
   8444 Shirk M B                  142 A  Sept 11
   8567 Simons Wm H                 76 K  Sept 12
   8659 Spould E                    90 E  Sept 13
   8773 Smith Wm                     2 K  Sept 14
   8795 Stella J F                   1 B  Sept 15
   9296 Signall ——, Cor             79 H  Sept 19
   9012 Steadman W                  54 F  Sept 17
   9123 Schably J                   54 A  Sept 18
   9138 Shoup S                Cav  16 B  Sept 18
   9310 Smith Chas                   7 H  Sept 20
   9365 Stebbins Z                   7 H  Sept 20
   9411 Scott D                    149 G  Sept 21
   9567 Snyder A                   148 I  Sept 23
   9593 Sternholt Wm                38 -  Sept 23
   9742 Supple C M, Cor             63 B  Sept 25
   9780 Surplus W, S’t         Cav  13 L  Sept 26
   9890 Siherk Christian           145 -  Sept 27
   9898 Sweeny W P             Cav  13 -  Sept 27
   9912 Sanford C                   69 H  Sept 28
   9985 Sheppard C, S’t            118 E  Sept 29
  10088 Sloan P                    115 A  Sept 30
  10132 Smith J S              Cav  22 B   Oct  1 64
  10299 Strong H                    55 E   Oct  4
  10323 Smith E                     10 H   Oct  4
  10516 Snyder Wm                   54 H   Oct  8
  10525 Stones T                   121 K   Oct  8
  10530 Smallwood C                  7 F   Oct  8
  10609 Small H                    101 H   Oct 10
  10720 Smallman J W                63 A   Oct 11
  10808 Steele F F             Cav  20 A   Oct 12
  10837 Shank A                    184 C   Oct 13
  11044 Smith Andrew            C   22 B   Oct 17
  11069 Stevens C P                 11 A   Oct 17
  11233 Smith H W                   53 B   Oct 21
  11246 Smith Jas                   57 E   Oct 21
  11355 Silvy David            Cav  18 I   Oct 23
  11368 Seyoff H                    81 C   Oct 23
  11488 Sunderland E                11 D   Oct 26
  11529 Stevenson Jno              111 I   Oct 26
  11661 Speck Olive                 67 H   Oct 30
  11741 Smith H                    183 D   Nov  2
  11785 Snodgrass R J              145 H   Nov  4
  11792 Sellentine M               145 C   Nov  4
  11825 Seltzer D                   20 K   Nov  5
  11885 Smith W B              Cav  14 E   Nov  6
  11890 Shure J P                  184 F   Nov  7
  11895 Snively G W            Cav  20 F   Nov  7
  11926 Scover J H                  79 G   Nov  8
  11951 Shefiley W                 118 G   Nov  9
  12057 Stitzer G                    2 E   Nov 16
  12081 Stensley D, Cor            184 A   Nov 18
  12217 Smith J S                  118 F   Dec  3
  12218 Skinner S O, Cor            77 A   Dec  4
  12282 Shafer T                   184 E   Dec 13
  12308 Stafford W                  67 H   Dec 19
  12384 Sourbeer J E                20 A   Jan  3 65
  12590 Sipe F                      87 C   Feb  5
  12598 Stauffer J                   1 K   Feb  6
  12648 Stain G W              Cav  20 K   Feb 13
  12669 Slough E B, Cor         “    1 D   Feb 17
  12670 Scott A J                   14 D   Feb 17
  12676 Sheridan M                 103 F   Feb 19
  12817 Sharks J N                  14 D   Mar 27
  12824 Shultz H H                  87 A   Apr  5
    778 Thistlewood J               73 E   Apr 28 64
    785 Tolland D              Cav  13 D   Apr 28
   1144 Taylor J F                  13 E   May 16
   1145 Tull D, Cor                  4 D   May 16
   1153 Toner Peter                 10 A   May 16
   1814 Thompson H                  57 C  June 10
   2182 Thompson A, Mus         C    4 C  June 19
   2302 Townsend D             Cav  18 D  June 22
   2635 Tyser L                    145 D  June 29
   2897 Terwilliger E, S’t         103 H  July  5
   3003 Thompson R                 103 F  July  7
     47 Taylor C W                  84 D   May 24
   3329 Titus W                    171 D  July 14
   3473 Todd Wm                    103 K  July 17
   3571 Thompson J S               183 H  July 19
   3768 Terrell A              Cav  12 B  July 22
   3968 Trumbull H                   3 E  July 25
   4116 Thompson Jas, S’t       C   18 G  July 28
   4160 Tinsdale ——                149 E  July 28
   4713 Thompson J             Art   3 A   Aug  4
   5179 Thompson W W               101 E   Aug  9
   5345 Thomas F                     7 F   Aug 11
   5966 Thompson J B               100 H   Aug 17
   6146 Thompson F A B              69 I   Aug 19
   6447 Tubbs E                    143 I   Aug 23 64
   6476 Toll Wm                Res  11 I   Aug 22
   6791 Turner Jno                 118 H   Aug 25
   7250 Thomas E                    23 F   Aug 30
   7409 Thorpe L                    61 E   Aug 31
   7904 Trash Seth                  81 A  Sept  6
   8231 Truman E W                   9 G  Sept  9
   8531 Tilt W                     115 A  Sept 12
   8619 Tutor C                    184 A  Sept 13
   9027 Tits P                       - C  Sept 17
   9212 Thorpe D                    18 D  Sept 19
   9302 Thompson H             Cav  18 I  Sept 20
   9726 Tonson J                    99 B  Sept 25
   9775 Thuck I                      7 C  Sept 26
   9981 Tones E                    145 F  Sept 26
  10008 Thompson J                  90 H  Sept 29
  10725 Tibbels Geo, Cor            69 K   Oct 11
  11002 Thatcher R                  14 C   Oct 16
  11407 Thompson J             Cav  12 E   Oct 24
  11754 Trespan P                   67 H   Nov  2
  12080 Townsend C, Cor            103 E   Nov 18
    971 Ulrick Jno                  17 E   May  9
   4184 Urndragh W                   4 B  July 28
  12133 Utter Wm                    45 H   Nov 23
   1369 Ventler Chas, S’t           75 G   May 25
   7739 Vogel L, Cor               150 A  June  8
   2428 Vernon S                     7 K  June 24
   4265 Vanholt T                   13 A  July 29
   5392 Vandeby B, S’t               7 A   Aug 12
   6877 Vanderpool F                57 B   Aug 26
   7716 Vancampments G              52 I  Sept  4
   8270 Vail G B                    77 G  Sept  9
   8791 Vaughan J                  108 A  Sept 15
   8948 Varndale J                 112 A  Sept 16
   9688 Vandier Wm, Cit Phila        - -  Sept 24
     57 Wilkins A              Cav  12 L   Mar 17
    128 Waterman Jno                88 B   Mar 23
    193 Wise Isaac                  18 G   Mar 27
    496 Wheeler J                  110 I   Apr 12
    516 Warren J                    76 A   Apr 12
    587 Weed A B                     4 K   Apr 17
    657 Wentworth Jas               83 G   Apr 21
    665 Watson F F                   2 B   Apr 22
    686 Wahl Jno                    73 C   Apr 23
    764 Wilson Jno             Cav  14 H   Apr 27
    852 Williams S              “   18 I   May  3
    941 Wolf J H                “   13 H   May  7
   1021 Wright J                “   12 B   May 11
   1067 Whitton Robt               145 C   May 13
   1093 Wright Wm              Cav  16 A   May 14
   1386 Wymans Jas, Cor            150 C   May 26
   1387 Wilson Jas             Cav  13 D   May 26
   1443 Williams F              “    3 B   May 28
   1494 Williams Fred              101 K   May 30
   1525 Wallace H              Cav  13 H   May 31
   1563 Waltermeyer H               76 H  June  2
   1721 Whitney W                   83 A  June  8
   1749 Woodsides W I               18 E  June  9
   1791 Wolf Samuel                 77 A  June 10
   1903 Woodward G W           Cav   3 -  June 13
   1977 Wyant H                    103 G  June 15
   2338 Walters C                   73 B  June 22
   2616 Williams J                  83 F  June 28
   2699 Wike A                      96 B  June 30
   2790 Whitaker, (negro)            8 -  July  2
   2937 Winsinger S                 96 E  July  6
   3023 Weider L                    50 H  July  7
   3135 Wallace A                  116 I  July 10
   3277 Wright W A             Cav  20 G  July 14
   3384 Woodruff W D               103 B  July 16
   3392 Wait Geo               Cav   1 G  July 16
   3605 Walker E                     7 A  July 19
   3694 White E D, S’t         Cav   2 H  July 21
   4181 Wisel M                 “   18 K  July 28
   4338 Ward Daniel                138 E  July 30
   3880 White M                      7 C  July 24
   3822 Wilson Andrew              103 H  July 23
   4069 Wolf A                     146 D  July 27
   4046 Winegardner A               73 G  July 27
   3921 Wilson Wm                   43 -  July 25
   4428 Williams Geo                54 H  July 31
   4702 Willebough E               148 I   Aug  4
   4828 Ward P                     103 B   Aug  6
   4966 Wetherholt C                54 F   Aug  7
   4981 Waserun G              Cav   4 I   Aug  7
   4996 White S                 “   14 B   Aug  7
   5106 Weaver Jas                  90 K   Aug  9
   5353 Wilks S                     77 G   Aug 11
   5458 Wilson Wm                    7 K   Aug 12
   5677 Weeks D                     53 G   Aug 14
   6050 Williams                     7 A   Aug 18
   6052 Waterhouse W            C    3 L   Aug 18
   6133 Workman A                  118 D   Aug 19
   6305 Whipple H, Cor              18 B   Aug 20
   6427 Wart C                     143 E   Aug 22
   6530 Winerman Jas                77 A   Aug 23
   6563 Wible Paul                  57 A   Aug 23
   6626 Walker S A                 103 I   Aug 23
   6808 Wick R C                   103 E   Aug 25
   6980 Woolslaer W H, Cor          77 C   Aug 27
   6981 White Jas P                149 D   Aug 27
   7023 Woodford J A               101 E   Aug 27
   7277 White Ed                   103 K   Aug 30
   7382 Webb J S                    69 K   Aug 31
   7386 Walton A, Ser          Cav   4 A   Aug 31
   7680 Wallwork T                 118 D  Sept  3
   7714 Warner L               Cav   5 C  Sept  3
   7799 Wynn H                     101 F  Sept  4
   7809 Wiggins D              Art   2 D  Sept  5
   7914 Weekland F                 101 K  Sept  5
   7933 Wade Geo W                 118 E  Sept  5
   8081 Weber W                    116 F  Sept  7
   8360 White D                Art   2 F  Sept 10
   8879 Wheeler J                    7 C  Sept 15
   9091 Wheeler C C            Cav  14 M  Sept 18
   9343 Williams W              “   20 -  Sept 20
   9434 Wilson W H                   3 I  Sept 21
   9534 Woolman H              Cav  18 A  Sept 23
   9573 Wingert C                  111 I  Sept 23
   9634 Wismer J                   100 A  Sept 24
   9657 Wilson G M             Cav   7 M  Sept 24
   9825 Walke G                 “    4 K  Sept 27
   9909 Wentley J                  155 G  Sept 28
  10092 Watson Wm                   99 I  Sept 30
  10217 Weeks C                     76 F   Oct  2
  10229 Waltz J                      7 H   Oct  2
  10236 Weekly John                 14 A   Oct  2
  10253 Weeks C                     76 F   Oct  3
  10315 Wolfhope J 1                84 A   Oct  4
  10400 Wilson G                    55 C   Oct  6
  10426 Wilson J                   118 D   Oct  6
  10521 Williams W                  46 K   Oct  8
  10568 Walk W                      87 E   Oct  9
  10632 Welsy Jno M, Cor           116 E   Oct 10
  10659 Watts A J              Cav  12 I   Oct 11 64
  10729 White J M                   21 G   Oct 11
  10797 Walker Wm                  148 B   Oct 12
   9464 Warner Cyrus W             184 B   Oct 21
  10840 Wright Wm                   16 I   Oct 13
  10902 Wolford D                   54 K   Oct 14
  10974 Watson C                   184 E   Oct 15
  11048 Wilderman E                 14 D   Oct 17
  11108 Walker A                    45 D   Oct 18
  11129 Wilson G                   140 F   Oct 18
  11498 Warrington J H             106 H   Oct 26
  11503 Waiter W                   184 F   Oct 26
  11557 Wood J, Ser                 19 C   Oct 27
  11722 Woodburn D J                 7 G   Nov  1
  11750 Wyncoop F P                  7 I   Nov  2
  11899 Webster J, Ser          C   20 L   Nov  7
  11978 Wilkinson C, Ser           104 I   Nov 12
  11987 Weaver J                    53 K   Nov 13
  12095 Walder John            Cav   5 L   Nov 19
  12098 Wider N H                  184 F   Nov 19
  12123 Weatherald H W               7 H   Nov 22
  12129 Webb C M, Ser              101 H   Nov 23
  12222 Williams J                 145 A   Dec  4
  12137 Wood J M                     2 A   Nov 23
  12380 Watson H                   184 A   Jan  2 65
  12485 Williams B                  75 B   Jan 19
  12493 Walker N C                  87 B   Jan 20
  10158 Van Dyke D L               103 A   Oct  1 64
  11810 Vanmarkes D                  6 E   Nov  4
  12154 Vanhatterman I               4 G   Nov 25
   3958 Vogle V                     78 D  July 25
   3799 Yocumbs W B                 93 B  July 22
   4900 Yocum D                Cav   1 M   Aug  6
   6103 Yingling E                  78 E   Aug 18
   6545 Yeager Samuel              158 D   Aug 23
  10204 Young J B                   49 G   Oct  2
  11040 Young W H                  145 F   Oct 17
  11872 Yeager J                    49 C   Nov  6
   1806 Zerphy J                    79 E  June 10
   4255 Zimmerman B                148 B  July 29
   6573 Zane Wm                     19 K   Aug 23
   4818 Zerl S                     103 F   Aug 25
  11327 Zane M                     118 E   Oct 23
    TOTAL 1808.


RHODE ISLAND.

   3266 Austin J A, S’t        Cav   1 H  July 13 64
   6231 Allen Chas              “    1 D   Aug 21
   1744 Boneley Wm              “    1 M  June  8
   1958 Bidmead Jas             “    1 G  June 14
   2521 Blake J F               “    1 M  June 26
   3647 Burk Jas                     1 C  July 20
   4261 Bether J                     2 C  July 29
   4576 Baine H                      5 A   Aug  2
   1339 Carpenter P            Cav   1 E   May 24
   1413 Carson B F              “    1 K   May 27
   3810 Callihan Jas           Bat   - -  July 23
   7966 Calvin E O, Cor        Art   5 A  Sept  6
  12832 Collins J H            Cav   1 A   Apr 16 65
    651 Delanah E B, S’t        “    1 G   Apr 20 64
   1217 Dix Geo                 “    1 M   May 19
   1435 Dickinson J, S’t        “    1 K   May 28
   3036 Dearborn G              “    1 -  July  8
   4742 Durden Robert           “    1 F   Aug  5
   4927 Doolittle G S          Art   2 B   Aug  6
   5670 Doyle Jas               “    5 A   Aug 14
    827 Eustace Geo C          Cav   1 M   May  1
  10203 Eaton A                Art   5 A   Oct  1 64
    939 Freelove H             Cav   1 H   May  7
   4538 Farrell Jas F          Art   1 A   Aug  2
   4672 Fay John                     2 G   Aug  4
   7356 Fay A                  Art   5 A   Aug 31
   1866 Goudy John              “    5 A  June 12
   4866 Gallagher C                  5 A   Aug  6
   5561 Garvey Wm              Art   5 A   Aug 13
   8308 Green R                      2 B  Sept 10
   9978 Green Daniel                 2 H  Sept 29
   1075 Henry T                Cav   1 F   May 13
   2656 Healy A                 “    1 D  June 29
   2746 Hunt C W                “    1 A  July  1
   3904 Hampstead J            Art   5 F  July 24
   7032 Hooker A               Cav   1 G   Aug 27
  11843 Hawkins D F                  5 A   Nov  5
  12016 Hanley T               Art   5 A   Nov 15
   1962 Ide S R                Cav   1 H  June 14
   3049 Johnson A G            Art   5 A  July  8
   2968 Kettell Jas            Cav   1 B  July  6
   3096 Kiney J                      2 B  July 20
   4215 Lewis Edward           Art   5 A  July 29
   5827 Littlebridge, Cor       “    5 A   Aug 16
   6798 Lee Cornelius           “    5 A   Aug 25
   7849 Leach L D              Cav   1 F  Sept  5
  11688 Livingston J, Mus       A    5 A   Oct 31
   1750 Miner S                Cav   1 D  June  9
   7393 McKay Thos                   2 F   Aug 31
   8306 McKenna J              Art   3 -  Sept 10
   3192 Northrop E             Cav   1 H  July 12
   7904 Navoo G                      5 K  Sept  5
    607 Peterson John                1 D   Apr 18
   7219 Rathburn J             Cav   1 A   Aug 29
   2382 Sweet M                 “    1 D  June 23
   2563 Spink J                 “    1 H  June 27
   2859 Slocum Geo T, 2 Lt      C    1 A  July  4
   4158 Smith P                Cav   1 A  July 28
   4949 Stalord J              Bat   1 A   Aug  7
   6186 Sisson Chas T          Art   5 A   Aug 19
   6187 Seymour H               “    5 A   Aug 19
   6351 Sullivan J              “    5 A   Aug 21
   7129 Sanders Chas            “    5 A   Aug 28
   7425 Slocum C A, Cor         “    5 A   Aug 31
   3075 Turner Chas                  7 E  July  9
   8522 Thomas J                     5 -  Sept 12
     19 Wright Moses           Cav   2 A   Mar  7
   1788 West H                       1 A  June 10
   3173 Wallace Wm             Art   5 A  July 11
   5908 Wood J B                     5 A   Aug 16
   6222 West J                 Cav   2 A   Aug 21
   6766 Wayne S                 “    1 A   Aug 25
   7831 Wilson J                     5 A  Sept  4
   9273 Witham B              lt A   1 -  Sept 19
    TOTAL 74.


TENNESSEE.

    883 Allen James W               11 B   May  4 64
    987 Amos F G                     2 C   May 10
   2313 Allison B F            Cav  13 D  June 22
   2631 Andrewson Joseph             2 C  June 29
   3167 Anderson S             Cav   8 B  July 11
   3194 Aber A                  “    7 A  July 12
   3334 Anglon Wm               “    7 A  July 15
   4004 Athens J H            East   2 C  July 26
   6411 Aikin Geo W, Cor             7 K   Aug 22
   6474 Ashby J F              Cav   7 B   Aug 22
   6541 Antoine P               “   13 H   Aug 23
   7572 Aspray Wm, S’t              13 B  Sept  2 64
   7907 Anderson C S, S’t           10 D  Sept  5
   9151 Achley A                     3 A  Sept 18
   9910 Atkins L                     2 D  Sept 28
   1895 Arrowood Jas           Cav   8 -  June 13
   8493 Alexander P S           “   13 D  Sept 11
  12710 Allen G W                    7 I   Feb 28 65
    539 Bowling Wm                  11 E   Apr 14 64
    585 Blason Benj                  2 E   Apr 17
    663 Bond Jas J T                 2 F   Apr 21
    695 Baker T K              Cav   5 -   Apr 23
    705 Batey W H                    2 B   Apr 24
    772 Burton Wm              Art   1 A   Apr 28
    808 Brannin Ellis                2 F   Apr 30
    845 Browden H V                  2 K   May  1
    859 Byerly W H                   1 A   May  3
    920 Brewer M                     2 E   May  6
   1053 Boyden A L                   2 B   May 13
   1137 Beatty Thomas                2 B   May 16
   1242 Bryant Jas A                 8 I   May 20
   1244 Barnard W H                  2 A   May 20
   1248 Boyd A D, Cor                2 F   May 20
   1527 Butler J J, S’t              7 B   May 31
   1538 Bradshaw A G                 2 B  June  1
   1610 Browning J                   2 F  June  4
   1635 Brown J                Cav  13 E  June  5
   1847 Branon Wm                    2 F  June 11
   1876 Birket W D, Cor              7 -  June 12
   1883 Burchfield W R               2 -  June 12
   1976 Berger W                     2 B  June 15
   2037 Berger W M                   2 B  June 15
   2555 Bontwright A, S’t            7 A  June 27
   2744 Brewer W T             Cav   7 A  June 27
   2939 Bibbs Alex              “    7 D  July  6
   2983 Bright John                  8 G  July  7
   3176 Blalock H                    2 D  July 11
   3198 Brown J B, S’t               2 F  July 12
      6 Brandon C                    4 D   Apr  4
     16 Burke John                   2 D   Apr 12
     52 Brummell A D                 2 H  June  3
     57 Broits S                     4 F  June 20
     58 Beeler Daniel                5 D  June 25
   3328 Barton F F             Cav  13 A  July 14
   3330 Bynom J W               “   13 C  July 14
   3414 Brennan James                2 I  July 16
   3636 Burris D B                  13 B  July 20
   3643 Brannan J                    2 A  July 20
   3726 Billings W                   6 I  July 21
   3786 Bowman J               Cav   7 C  July 22
   3934 Boles H                     13 C  July 25
   4108 Boyd W H               Cav   9 C  July 27
   4221 Barnes A C                  15 H  July 29
   4770 Bryant Wm                    2 D   Aug  5
   5017 Butler W W             Cav   7 B   Aug  8
   4371 Bradfield E L                7 C  July 31
   5749 Brummetti B                 11 C   Aug  8
   5277 Barnhart D F                 7 B   Aug 11
   5294 Baker Isaac                 13 B   Aug 11
   5313 Blackwood G W               11 B   Aug 11
   5533 Boles G W              Cav  13 B   Aug 13
   5617 Baker M A               “   13 E   Aug 14
   6003 Boles W G               “   13 B   Aug 17
   6142 Boyles K                     2 C   Aug 19
   6194 Burnett S H                  6 H   Aug 19
   6287 Butler W J                   7 B   Aug 20
   6569 Barnes Wm              Cav   7 M   Aug 23
   6672 Bishop W                “    7 H   Aug 23
   7130 Brewer J                     2 D   Aug 31 64
   7664 Bales Henry                  2 K  Sept  2
   7943 Boyer D                     15 D  Sept  5
   8222 Bird S H               Cav  13 D  Sept  8
   8998 Blackner Thos           “    7 L  Sept 17
   9023 Bill F                       5 I  Sept 17
   9079 Boyle R C              Cav   7 I  Sept 17
   9149 Bean C S                “    3 E  Sept 18
   9478 Bowlen C F                  13 B  Sept 21
   9543 Bromley H, S’t               7 -  Sept 23
   4888 Brannon L                    2 A   Aug  6
  10098 Byerly James           E C   1 A  Sept 30
  10452 Bible W                      8 D   Oct  7
  10617 Blackney B                   7 E   Oct 10
  10826 Bartholomew J          Cav   7 H   Oct 13
  11015 Bosworth W H            “    7 E   Oct 16
  11298 Brogan John, Cor             2 C   Oct 22
  11372 Brown J B, Cor               2 K   Oct 23
  12171 Bradford H A                 7 E   Oct 26
  12565 Brown J W                   13 B   Jan 31 65
  12613 Barnhart G                   7 C   Feb  8
  12662 Barnes F B             Cav   7 D   Feb 16
    462 Bell E S                     4 C   Apr  9 64
   4782 Barnes G                    10 D   Aug  5
    189 Cardwell W C                 6 C   Mar 27
    216 Conaster Philip              2 D   Mar 28
    230 Chimney Jesse, S’t           2 A   Mar 29
    375 Colwell J H                  2 C   Apr  5
    436 Crosswell Samuel             2 K   Apr  8
    459 Childers J M                 2 D   Apr 19
    482 Clark Lewis            Cav   2 B   Apr  9
    615 Covington A                  2 K   Apr 18
    717 Chitwood J H                 2 G   Apr 24
    811 Carden Robert                2 C   Apr 30
    840 Cardwell W C                 6 G   May  2
   1050 Cooper C                     2 B   May 12
   1213 Clark Alexander              2 C   May 19
   1425 Cross M C                    2 F   May 28
   1574 Childers J                  13 A  June  3
   1636 Clemens J D            Cav   7 D  June  5
   1751 Campbell W                   2 A  June  9
   1839 Carden A K             Cav   7 E  June 11
   2031 Covington J B                2 K  June 15
   2062 Carwin James                 1 -  June 16
   2071 Crow J, S’t                  2 F  June 16
   2289 Crawford A             Cav  13 B  June 21
   2466 Childers Thomas L            2 G  June 25
   2632 Cooper E                     1 A  June 20
   2789 Cook W P E                   2 A  July  1
   2858 Cooper G W                   7 B  July  4
   2886 Collins W                    2 H  July  4
   2940 Carter H C             Cav  13 E  July  6
   3687 Cross N                      2 H  July 21
   3983 Corwine J             East   - G  July 26
   4601 Cornish A              Cav  13 C   Aug  4
   5298 Chase A P               “    7 I   Aug 11
   5829 Collins R               “    7 K   Aug 16
   5893 Clyne E T, S’t          “   11 E   Aug 16
   6310 Crews G                Cav   7 B   Aug 20
   7523 Childers E                  13 E  Sept  1
   7525 Clark James                 13 A  Sept  1
   7601 Cunise E               Cav   7 I  Sept  2
   7702 Childers W E             “   7 E  Sept  3
   7857 Cothrain S                  13 E  Sept  5
   7871 Camp W W                     7 K  Sept  5
   7880 Cotterell G W                7 C  Sept  5
   8219 Creesy S P             Cav   7 K  Sept  8
   9021 Crum A                       4 F  Sept 17 64
   9208 Cooley J               Cav   7 L  Sept 18
   9698 Chadwick M                  16 I  Sept 24
  10137 Cole Geo M, S’t              9 C   Oct  1
  10268 Clay H                      13 H   Oct  3
  10403 Cleaver W                    7 G   Oct  6
  10654 Churchill E                 13 A   Oct 11
  11239 Cheek R                Cav   6 D   Oct 20
  11312 Carter W B                  11 E   Oct 22
  12643 Camway H                     6 K   Feb 13 65
    302 Dodd Benjamin                2 D April  1 64
    399 Doss J W                     2 C April  6
    485 Dudley Sam             Cav   1 A April  9
    645 Dutrow Irdell                2 G April 20
    759 Duncan G W, Cor              2 B April 27
    856 Doak I V                     2 F   May  3
    894 Davis Leroy                  7 K   May  5
   1016 Diggs J G                    2 C   May  9
     43 Dykes Pleasant               2 K   May 11
   1182 Duff I W                    16 B   May 18
   1581 Davis J W                    2 C  June  3
   2266 Dabney B                     1 A  June 20
   2366 Daniel Suttrell              2 K  June 23
   2449 Diggs Jno G           East   2 C  June 25
   3513 Deer H                       7 M  July 18
   3667 Davis J                      3 A  July 20
   5398 Disney E W, S’t         C   11 C   Aug 12
   6261 Dunn R                      19 I   Aug 20
   6991 Dyn Wm                 Cav   7 K   Aug 27
   4821 Draan R H                   10 I   Aug  5
   8423 Davis Levi             Cav   7 K  Sept 11
   7219 Davis James                  7 C   Aug 30
   7608 Diel S F, S’t          Cav   7 B  Sept  2
   8329 Dyer W                  “    7 K  Sept 10
   9373 Dodd Chas, Citizen Dec       - -  Sept 20
   9453 Dort R                       7 G  Sept 21
   9701 Duke Wm                      7 E  Sept 25
  10014 Dyer H                 Cav   4 A  Sept 29
  10244 Davis Wm                     7 D   Oct  3
  12119 Dodd J A               Cav   1 M   Nov 22
  12379 Dykes L                      2 K   Jan  2 65
  12498 Delf E                       8 C   Jan 21
  12794 Doty I, Citizen              - -   Jan 18
    293 Edwards I                    5 B April  1 64
    360 Everitt A T                  2 A April  2
    510 Evans S D                    8 C April 12
    557 Everitte John                2 G April 14
    848 Evans W, S’t                 7 C   May  3
    873 Edwards C S                  5 B   May  4
    970 Evans J M                    7 M   May  9
    979 Etler Valentine             11 D   May  9
   1836 Emmert J C, S’t              4 -  June 14
     55 Eddes James C                2 E  June 16
   3761 Ellison Isaac,        East   2 F  July 22
   4785 Ellis C O              Cav  13 C   Aug  5
   5904 Ethridge Wm                 13 B   Aug 16
   7402 Elder P                      2 F   Aug 31
   9075 Escue H, Cor           Cav   6 -  Sept 17
  10560 Elliott Wm                   4 A   Oct  9
  10985 Easton J               Cav  13 B   Oct 16
  11639 Ellington J             “   13 B   Oct 30
    353 Fairchilds Jesse             2 B April  2
    683 Fryer W L, S’t               2 H April 23
    697 Fagen Parker                 8 I April 23
   1145 Fannon G H             StG   - - April 28
   2408 Fisher C N                   2 K  June 24
   2506 Francisco R            Cav   7 B  June 26
     62 Friar John                   2 H  July  9 64
   2835 Fox E                  StG   - -  July  3
   5820 Firestone ——           Cav   1 M   Aug 11
   5997 Frazier John                 8 H   Aug 17
   6299 Flowers W P, S’t        C   13 B   Aug 20
   7244 Franks W W                   2 B   Aug 29
   7782 Fields R G                   1 -  Sept  4
   8555 Finch A                Cav   7 L  Sept 12
  10133 Finch J B                    7 B   Oct  1
  12502 Franshier J D                8 K   Jan 21 65
   3006 Fowler I                     4 A  July  7 64
   3733 Finch H                Cav   7 I  July 21
    578 Goddard John                 2 B April 16
   1831 German P                     2 C  June 11
   2043 Gorman James                 6 -  June 15
   2571 Graham J D             Cav   7 D  June 27
   2891 Gooding James                2 D  July  4
      3 Guild James                 11 B   Mar 18
     15 Graves Henry                 2 E April 11
     59 Gray John W                  2 I  June 29
   3291 Gorman F                     6 B  July 14
   3357 Grays L                     12 F  July 15
   9238 Gamon I A              Cav   7 A  Sept 19
   3620 Grundee Alex                 4 D  July 20
   3719 Grier J O, Cor               7 B  July 21
   3887 Gilson C G                   1 B  July 24
   4531 Grevett S P            Cav   7 C   Aug  1
   5182 Given I A                    9 I   Aug  9
   5146 Griswell T J           Cav   7 H   Aug  9
   5374 Garrett M T             “    7 L   Aug 11
   5388 Green S G               “    7 I   Aug 12
   6376 Grims Wm                     2 A   Aug 21
   6400 Graves J C                   2 E   Aug 21
   6498 Grisson C                    8 B   Aug 22
   7221 Green J C                    7 I   Aug 29
   7454 Gunter R C, S’t             13 A  Sept  4
   7908 Griswold W H           Cav   7 K  Sept  5
   8012 Gibbs J A               “    7 L  Sept  6
   8003 Griffin W A             “    2 C  Sept  7
   8046 Gill G W                “    1 L  Sept 16
   9271 Gaff R                  “    1 C  Sept 19
   9875 Gibson James            “   13 -  Sept 27
  10334 Gardner H               “   14 C   Oct  4
  10590 Garrison A, Cor              7 E   Oct 10
  11063 Galbraith G W          Cav   7 E   Oct 17
  11632 Grier J                      7 B   Oct 28
  11925 Giles M C                    7 I   Nov  8
  12402 Ganon T                Cav   4 I   Jan  6 65
  12438 Gilbert Wm              “    7 C   Jan 12
  12464 Golden J H              “    7 C   Jan 18
   1000 Gray Thomas                 11 E   May 19 64
    433 Graves James                 2 E April  8
     58 Hampton I A                  8 D   Mar 16
     85 Henniger Peter              11 I   Mar 21
    163 Hoover Samuel                2 B   Mar 26
    316 Huff Benjamin                2 K April  2
    357 Huckleby Thomas              2 C April  2
    467 Hickson George              11 E April  9
    616 Hurd Wm                      2 B April 18
    660 Head Wm                Cav  12 B April 21
    682 Hixton John                  2 F April 23
    714 Henderson Robert             2 B April 24
    805 Hayes J                      7 E April 29
    844 Hughes E                     2 I   May  2
    958 Hickley Thomas               2 K   May  8
   1036 Hickson Henry                2 I   May 12
   1124 Hall John                    2 B   May 15
   1159 Heatherby John               1 C   May 19 64
   1491 Hickson Daniel               2 F   May 31
   1551 Hopkins A              Art   1 A  June  2
   1554 Hunt J                       2 B  June  2
   1766 Harrison Wm                  8 I  June  9
   1774 Hodges I M                   2 F  June  9
   1846 Harman A B                   4 A  June 11
   1925 Hendson J S                  2 K  June 14
   1950 Hickerman T            Cav   9 B  June 14
   2276 Hilton A F, S’t              2 H  June 20
   2375 Hugely C W             Cav  13 D  June 23
   2491 Hawa E A                     2 B  June 26
   2642 Hale R H                     3 F  June 29
   2851 Hall B A                     2 A  July  4
   2949 Hudson J A             Cav   8 F  July  9
   3012 Haines J A                  13 E  July  7
   4855 Hall J J               Cav  13 E   Aug  6
   4836 Hermsen Wm              “   13 B   Aug  6
   4805 Haywood J G                  7 I   Aug  5
   3098 Hawkins S D                  3 E  July 10
   3121 Hodgen ——                    7 K  July 10
   3248 Hopson Thos            Cav   3 E  July 13
   3421 Howard A                     2 F  July 16
   3672 Heckman Wm, Cor              2 G  July 20
   3712 Henderson J R                6 B  July 21
   3729 Hendlay J                    9 A  July 21
   3807 Hayes J C              Cav   7 C  July 22
   4535 Henry Wm                     7 C   Aug  1
   5278 Hudson John                 55 I   Aug 11
   5526 Harvey Morgan                2 F   Aug 11
   5535 Hensley James M              3 E   Aug 13
   5604 Hicks M                      2 I   Aug 14
   5607 Hasborough J H          C   13 E   Aug 14
   6393 Haines G               Cav  13 A   Aug 21
   6553 Hughes Wm                    2 F   Aug 23
   6581 Hibbrath M H           Cav   7 I   Aug 27
   6648 Harris A G                   5 E   Aug 23
   6681 Horton W C             Cav   7 H   Aug 24
   7808 Hinson John             “    7 H  Sept  4
   8094 Hallford J A                13 A  Sept  7
   8115 Hicks E                      9 F  Sept  7
   8486 Hale Ira               Cav   7 C  Sept 11
   8529 Haywood A J, Ser             7 I  Sept 12
   9044 Henderson A G               13 C  Sept 13
   9788 Hodges John                 13 E  Sept 26
   9797 Herbs D                Cav   1 D  Sept 26
   9805 Haney H                 “    7 A  Sept 26
   9892 Hanks A, Ser                11 D  Sept 27
  10003 Hall W R                     2 D  Sept 29
  10145 Halliwarke ——                7 E   Oct 10
  10329 Hooks John L           Cav   7 A   Oct  4
  10810 Holler W                “    6 E   Oct 12
  10956 Holloway H B                 2 G   Oct 14
  11377 Herman H                     4 K   Oct 23
  11791 Hickman D                    2 I   Nov  4
  11801 Howard ——                   16 -   Nov  4
  11861 Higgs L                      7 D   Nov  6
  12028 Hazzle Wm                    7 C   Nov 13
  12146 Hall J M                     1 A   Nov 24
  12212 Hanley T                     2 E   Dec  2
  12423 Hoag B F                     7 E   Jan  9 65
  12655 Huffaker J                   2 K   Feb 14
  12693 Hanbuck J                    7 K   Feb 22
   1941 Israel S                    21 B  June 14 64
   9515 Irwin P P                   49 F  Sept 22
     52 Jones Rufus                  2 I   Mar 16
    291 Jones Warren T              11 C   Apr  1
    358 Jeffers J                    2 C   Apr  2 64
    584 Jack Benjamin S              2 B   Apr 17
    668 Jones H D                    4 F   Apr 22
   1181 Johnson E A, Ser             2 A   May 18
   1227 Johnson S L                  2 A   May 19
   1536 Jones John J           Cav  13 C  June  1
   3805 Jones H                      2 H  July 22
   3980 Johnson A                   10 C  July 26
   4571 Jones D                      6 C   Aug  2
   5517 Johnson C F                  7 K   Aug 13
   5921 Jones J M                    2 K   Aug 17
   7447 Jones Alb’t, Ser        C   13 B  Sept  1
   8013 Joiner J M             Cav   7 B  Sept  6
   8503 Jones J                 “   13 B  Sept 12
   8560 Johnson J Cor         East   3 -  Sept 12
   8764 Johnson C M                  - K  Sept 14
   9552 Jones D                     11 E  Sept 23
   9618 Jones Wm T, Cor         C   11 -  Sept 23
  10479 Johnson M              Cav  13 G   Oct  7
  12319 Johnson E W             “    7 C   Dec 21
  12702 Johnson W                   13 D   Feb 26 65
     32 Kirby James                  - M   Mar 11 64
    434 Kilpatrick R                 2 E   Apr  8
    595 Kelsey John, Ser             2 A   Apr 17
    600 Kentzler Henry               2 G   Apr 17
     35 King James T                 2 D   Apr 25
   3702 Kirk B J               Cav   7 B  July 21
   3749 Keene Hoza              “    7 C  July 22
   7367 Keen J S                “    7 C   Aug 31
   7641 Kirk J P                     3 D  Sept  2
   8183 Kingsley S                   2 D  Sept  8
   8714 Kenser Jos             Cav   2 -  Sept 14
   9407 Kelley J W, S’t              2 E  Sept 21
  11241 Kissinger F                  7 I   Oct 21
  12570 Kidwell J                    4 C   Feb  2 65
   1157 Kuner E B                    3 E   May 16 64
    627 Long Jonathan                2 H April 19
    688 Lane L E                     2 I April 23
    713 Lofty R J                    2 I April 24
   1223 Lovette W T            Cav  13 A   May 19
   1252 Langley E G                 11 B   May 21
   1352 Long C C                     2 C   May 25
   1597 Long John                    2 C  June  3
   2193 Looper E                     2 D  June 19
      8 Lanen Thomas                 2 H April  5
     45 Lingo James                  2 C   May 17
     53 Levi J N                     2 I  June  3
   3696 Lamphey J              Cav   7 C  July 21
   3760 Little E D                   7 A  July 22
   3830 Lemmar J E, S’t         C   13 A  July 23
   4114 Lawrence J C           Cav  13 I  July 28
   4292 Lewis R                Bat   1 B  July 30
   4575 Long John                   13 H   Aug  2
   8640 Lawson M                     8 H  Sept 13
   8926 Lawson H G                   8 I  Sept 14
   9594 Lester James           Cav   7 M  Sept 23
   9641 Lewis J                      3 G  Sept 24
  11827 Laprint J                   11 K   Nov  5
   1352 Long C C                     2 C   May 25
  11979 Leonard J                    7 C   Nov 12
    388 McCune Robert                2 E April  5
    405 Meyers W J                  12 F April  6
    558 Miller W H                   2 F April 15
    562 Macklin John                 2 H April 15
    583 Malcolm S A                  4 B April 16
    722 Maines Wm                    1 D April 27
    801 McCart Wm                    2 B April 29
    845 McDowell G I                 2 D April 26 64
   1051 Mynck Eli                    2 A   May 12
   1176 May W                       10 C   May 16
   1289 Meyers D                     2 H   May 22
   1402 Martin F A                   2 A   May 27
   1451 McLane H C            East   2 I   May 29
   1561 Massie Eli                   2 C  June  1
   1668 Myers John, Cor              2 H  June  6
   1703 Moulden Wm                   2 A  June  7
   1723 McCart J                     2 B  June  8
   1960 McDonald L M, S’t            2 G  June 14
   2050 Meyers Wm, S’t               2 H  June 16
   2171 Matheney D C                 7 D  June 19
   2224 Melterberger M               2 G  June 20
   2277 Morris J, Cor          Cav   2 E  June 20
   2475 Mitchiner H                 13 H  June 25
   2500 Mackin W               Cav   7 K  June 26
   2516 Moss J                       2 A  June 26
   3124 McAllister W H          C    4 H  July 10
     24 Mayes William                2 E   Apr 15
     38 Mee Thomas                   2 F April 29
     46 Mergen H S                   2 G   May 18
   3243 McGee Wm               Cav   7 B  July  3
   3642 Maynard W J                 13 A  July 20
   4567 Miller J W             Cav   8 G   Aug  2
   4523 McLean A G                   3 C   Aug  1
   3897 McCoy W C                    2 G  July 24
   4236 McDover H                    2 C  July 29
   4237 Montgomery Wm                4 C  July 29
   4751 McGwin M               Cav   7 C   Aug  5
   4905 Mussurgo M             Cav   9 H   Aug  6
   4496 Mulanox A C, Cor             2 B   Aug  1
   5008 Myers A                Cav  13 C   Aug  8
   5064 Miles Samuel                 2 A   Aug  8
   5282 Morris H S             Cav  13 C   Aug 11
   5594 Mitchell Jas            “    7 K   Aug 14
   5782 Miflin Wm                   13 B   Aug 15
   6555 Maddro Jas                   2 C   Aug 23
   7435 Mefford J, Cor         Cav   8 C  Sept  1
   7574 Moore Jas                   13 -  Sept  2
   7764 McGee A                     13 B  Sept  4
   8059 Mayher J W                   2 E  Sept  7
   8174 Martin J S             Cav   7 H  Sept  8
   8954 Mackey S                     7 D  Sept 16
   9140 McKeese Sam’l          Cav   8 G  Sept 17
   9542 McDonald W                   7 E  Sept 23
   9559 Montgomery C F          C    1 L  Sept 29
   9783 Metheney V V            C   13 A  Sept 26
   9861 Macart R                     2 B  Sept 27
  10795 Martin S               Cav   7 G   Oct 12
  10976 Meare J H               “    7 I   Oct 15
  11532 May S L                 “    9 A   Oct 26
  11544 McCaslin M C                 7 D   Oct 27
  11649 Myracle C                    7 C   Oct 30
  11667 Morris Wm              Cav   7 I   Oct 30
  11845 Moore Wm P                  11 D   Nov  5
  12277 McNearly W             Cav   7 C   Dec  3
  12338 Moore T                 “    7 I   Dec 26
   7497 Norton J                    10 K  Sept  1
    160 Newman Jesse                 2 K   Mar 25
    828 Norris Thomas                2 D   May  1
   1237 Norman J, Cor           C   13 C   May 20
   3191 Newport H              Cav  11 E  July 12
     50 Nicely A                     8 H  June  2
   6262 Nichols W T            Cav   7 A   Aug 20
   7818 Newman T A, S’t              4 -  Sept  4
   9068 Norwood Wm             Cav   7 I  Sept 17
   9447 Norris P W             Cav   7 B  Sept 21 64
   9640 Needham F                   13 C  Sept 24
   9996 Neighbour M                  7 E  Sept 29
  10223 Norris W                     2 D   Oct  2
  12642 Neighbor A                   7 B   Feb 13 65
   4689 Odorn John, S’t              8 B   Aug  4 64
   1753 Owen A                       2 D  June  9
  10743 Oliver L                    13 C   Oct 11
    923 Ollenger John                2 I   May  6
   2697 Overton J S                  2 C  June 30
    689 Palmer Wm                    2 K April 23
    806 Perkins G W, S’t             7 M April 29
   1141 Penix John                   5 G   May 16
   1363 Perry Jas              Cav   6 L   May 25
   1517 Proffett Jas                13 C   May 31
   1638 Powers H, S’t          Cav   7 A  June  5
   2146 Parder E H                  11 K  June 18
   2748 Perry Thomas                13 B  July  1
   2767 Pursley W B, S’t        C   13 C  July  2
   3170 Pankey A J                  13 B  July 11
    506 Pilot Joseph                 2 K April 12
   4592 Piscall J B                 13 B   Aug  3
   4572 Powell A N, S’t              7 K   Aug  2
   8605 Pavies S               Cav   7 C  Sept 12
      1 Polivar Martin               2 E   Mar 12
     10 Phillips N                   2 H April  5
     32 Parker Wiley                 3 B April 25
   4041 Parmer E                     7 I  July 26
   4380 Palmer D P             Cav   7 I  July 31
   6190 Parks R T               “    7 I   Aug 19
   6335 Prison E T                   7 B   Aug 21
   6485 Princes Nelson              15 B   Aug 22
   6600 Phillips T                   2 G   Aug 23
   7290 Park Jas               Cav   7 E   Aug 30
   9020 Penn W H                     2 E  Sept 17
   9121 Paddock D W, Cor        C    2 I  Sept 17
   9606 Pennington G W, Cor         11 -  Sept 23
  10304 Pegram W                     7 A   Oct  4
  10318 Powers H M, Cor              7 A   Oct  4
  10364 Poster N P, S’t             13 E   Oct  4
  10655 Pomeroy John                 7 K   Oct 11
  10852 Pierce Wm                    8 A   Oct 13
  10907 Parkham W                    7 K   Oct 14
  11285 Pickering E            Cav   4 G   Oct 22
  11406 Pinkley J                    7 B   Oct 24
  11501 Powers J               Cav   7 A   Oct 26
  12644 Powers R                “    7 H   Feb 13 65
    675 Perry Wesley                 2 I April 22 64
   1978 Pope F                 Cav   7 D  June 15
   2232 Quiller T               “    7 D  June 20
    271 Ragan J                      2 B   Mar 28
    380 Ronden Wm                    2 A April  5
    382 Reynolds Henry          C   11 L April  5
    454 Russell R                    2 K April  9
   4644 Roberts John                 2 F   Aug  3
   5815 Ronser A, Cor                1 A   Aug 16
   2519 Reed John C                  7 A  June 26
    523 Robinson Jas M               3 A April 13
    646 Robinson Isaac               3 A April 20
    951 Robinson Wm                  1 G   May  8
   1438 Rayle F                Art   1 C   May 28
   1450 Reice James                 13 C   May 29
   1783 Ralph J F                   13 E  June 10
   1924 Reed G W                     7 A  June 14
   2005 Ringoland W H                2 D  June 15
   2006 Rabb G W                    13 A  June 15
   2093 Ryan Wm                      3 K  June 17
   2219 Robinson J C                 2 B  June 20 64
   2314 Roberts T                    2 H  June 22
   2691 Riley J M                    6 G  June 30
   2750 Ryan C P                     2 G  July  1
     17 Riddle Robert                2 F April 12
   3752 Ritter John                  3 C  July 22
   2755 Robbins T                    2 D  July 22
   3772 Reeves Geo W                 4 F  July 22
   4086 Robinson A                   2 B  July 27
   4254 Renshaw H G            Cav   7 C  July 29
   4368 Rainwater A                  7 F  July 31
   5974 Riter Henry            Cav   7 E   Aug 17
   4616 Roberts Chas                 7 A   Aug  3
   6267 Reeves A               Cav  11 B   Aug 20
   6409 Rider W R, S’t              13 C   Aug 22
   6837 Rogers A G             Cav   7 B   Aug 25
   7082 Russell J S                  7 E   Aug 28
   7090 Ross John              Cav   7 B   Aug 28
   7099 Roach J W               “    7 K   Aug 28
   7190 Riter John                   7 E   Aug 29
   7774 Reynolds W                   3 G  Sept  4
   7978 Reagan Geo W                 3 G  Sept  6
   8137 Rose M L              East   2 A  Sept  8
   8523 Ramsay W A                   - -  Sept 12
   9513 Renmeger Jeff          Cav  13 E  Sept 22
  10107 Richardson R            “   13 E  Sept 30
  10869 Rushing W R                  7 B   Oct 13
  11995 Roberts J G                  7 I   Nov 18
  12101 Risley J                     6 E   Nov 20
  12753 Robins W                     7 B   Mar 12 65
   8968 Reeder C, Sutler            51 -  Sept 16 64
    298 Stinger A E                  2 K April  1
    319 Sane Joseph                  8 B April  2
    374 Sukirk J F                   2 B April 15
    390 Smith John             Cav   2 I April 16
    776 Scott R S                    2 - April 28
    985 Smithpater Eli              11 K   May  9
   1140 Seals John                   2 D   May 16
   1191 Stepp Preston                2 D   May 18
   1254 Stafford Wm            Cav  13 C   May 21
   1278 Sisson James                 2 E   May 22
   1284 Smith T A                    2 C   May 22
   1313 Short L H              Cav   7 C   May 23
   1353 Smith C                      2 B   May 25
   1408 Simpkins Thomas              9 A   May 27
   1475 Smith Joel                   2 A   May 30
   1481 Stansberry A                 8 A   May 30
   1488 Sutton John                  2 I   May 31
   1526 Stover A                     2 C   May 31
   1670 Smith Wm                     2 D  June  6
   2280 Stevens R                    2 D  June 20
   2284 Smith J                Cav  13 E  June 21
   2958 Smith J B                   20 I  July  6
     11 Stanton W                    4 E April  5
     12 Sutton Thomas                2 I April  8
     39 Sandusky G                   2 B April 29
     56 Stout D D                    2 F  June 18
   3035 Scarbrough S N              13 E  July  8
   3276 Shrop J B             East   2 E  July 14
   3298 Sells W               East   2 D  July 14
   3322 Swappola O B                 4 A  July 15
   3520 Slaver A               Cav  11 C  July 18
   3865 Smith John M                12 M  July 24
   4038 Sapper S                     8 H  July 26
   4170 Snow W                 Cav   7 M  July 28
   5462 Smith L                     13 L   Aug 13
   5625 Sutton Andrew           C   13 E   Aug 14
   5859 Swan John                    2 D   Aug 16 64
   5962 Scott John                  13 B   Aug 17
   6643 Sutton D               Cav   1 H   Aug 23
   7056 Smith J                      6 M   Aug 28
   7296 Stewart J W            Cav  13 B   Aug 30
   7314 Smidney E               “    1 E   Aug 30
   7787 Scobey L A H            “   13 B  Sept  2
   7923 Sarret Jas D           StG   - -  Sept  5
   8637 Smith J                Cav   3 E  Sept 13
   9192 Smith T A                   13 C  Sept 18
   9381 Southerland J          Cav  13 C  Sept 20
   9395 Stewart E               “   13 D  Sept 20
   9555 Smith W H                    7 B  Sept 23
   9719 Swatzell W L           Cav   8 E  Sept 25
   9803 Stratten J L            “    7 M  Sept 25
  10409 Stafford S                  13 A   Oct  6
  10454 Shonall John                13 C   Oct  7
  11594 Shay D                      11 E   Oct 28
  12558 Smith H                      2 E   Jan 30 65
  12749 Stevens J F            Cav   2 E   Mch  8
  12756 Smith J D                    4 C   Mch 12
  12784 Stewart R H                  7 C   Mch 15
  12800 Shook N A                    7 B   Mch 19
  12836 Smith George                 2 B April 18
     36 Stiner W H                   2 E April 28 64
   3995 Slorer A W                   2 C  July 26
    211 Tompkins T B                 2 F   Mch 28
    258 Thompson W D                 2 F   Mch 31
    793 Thompson Charles             2 - April 29
    932 Thomas W H                   2 K   May  7
   1657 Tomlin A               Cav   7 M  June  6
   1704 Thanton S A            Art   1 H  June  7
   2229 Tice S J                     7 B  June 20
   2718 Tipton W H                   2 I  July  1
   3460 Taylor J                    13 D  July 17
   4122 Tyffle John            Cav   1 A  June 28
   4778 Templeton G W                2 C   Aug  5
   5646 Tite W S                    13 C   Aug 14
   7052 Thomas W H             Cav   7 A   Aug 28
   9203 Tolley D                     8 H  Sept 19
   9375 Terry D                Cav   9 D  Sept 20
  10780 Thinn R A               “    7 B   Oct 12
  12694 Tidwell T                   13 D   Feb 22 65
   4825 Tidwell J W                 13 C   Aug  5 64
   2592 Usley T R                    2 A  June 28
   4518 Undergrate A                 2 I   Aug  2
    885 Vaugh I                      8 H   May  5
   1203 Vanhorn J                    2 H   May 19
   2915 Varner T W             Cav  11 E  July  5
   7217 Vanhook J M, Cor        C   11 H  July 29
   4530 Vaughry Frederick            2 D   Aug  1
     60 Wolfe John                  11 E   Mch 18
    259 Woolen I                     2 A   Mch 31
    339 Webb Robert                  2 B April  2
    359 Wuas M                       2 I April  2
    501 Watts C C                    2 A April 12
    570 Ward Jordan                  2 A April 15
    810 White John                   2 B April 30
    902 William C                    7 B   May  5
   1052 Ward A                       3 I   May 12
   1756 Watts J W                    7 M  June  9
   1794 White I                      2 D  June 10
   1865 Wallace L             East   2 C  June 12
   2057 Ward C                       2 H  June 16
   2066 Watts T, Cor                 2 I  June 16
   2132 Wray Samuel                 13 C  June 18
   2496 Wilson A               Cav   8 -  June 26
   2764 Winningham J                 2 B  July  2 64
   2810 Wells E                      8 H  July  3
   3021 Watkins J M                  4 I  July  7
   3031 Woodsend T                   7 K  July  8
   3189 Webb D                 Cav   8 G  July 12
     21 Winchester J D          “    1 E April 15
     19 Weaver P                     2 D April 13
   4554 West W F                     2 H   Aug  2
   4869 Ward John, Citizen           - -   Aug  6
     22 Whitby R B                   2 C April 15
     33 Weese W                      2 I April 23
   3297 Weir I                 Cav   1 B  July 14
   3304 Wilson H                     2 B  July 14
   3319 Wolf A                      10 C  July 14
   3458 Williams A             Cav   3 E  July 17
   3615 Willis James           StG   - -  July 20
   3714 Webbe J                      2 B  July 21
   3737 Wilson J                    12 F  July 21
   3982 Wilson S L                   2 D  July 26
   4033 Walford W                    7 A  July 26
   4704 Wallace L                    2 C   Aug  4
   5267 Wright J W             Cav   7 B   Aug 10
   5572 Withyde S                    1 A   Aug 14
   6108 Wood P D                     3 B   Aug 19
   6580 Webb Robert                  2 B   Aug 23
   6608 Wortell H H            Cav   7 I   Aug 23
   7618 White R O M                 13 B  Sept  2
   8740 Whicks N                     7 H  Sept 14
   7231 Wood J                       7 C   Aug 29
   9193 Woolsey J                    2 F  Sept 18
   9479 Walker John            Cav  13 C  Sept 21
   9658 Williams C S            “    9 B  Sept 24
   9670 Whittle H W             “    7 C  Sept 24
   9730 Webb T                       6 G  Sept 25
   9929 White L S              Cav  11 D  Sept 28
  10337 Wiggins G W             “   11 C   Oct  4
  10338 White H S’t             “    7 A   Oct  4
  10739 Warrell J W, Cor        C    7 -   Oct 11
  10605 Webb W                       3 A   Oct 10
  11386 Warden J W, S’t              7 E   Oct 24
  12107 Winelug J                    7 M   Nov 21
  12125 White Wm M                  11 D   Nov 22
  12139 Watson I C             Cav   7 C   Nov 23
  12576 Walker C H                   6 H   Feb  3 65
  12699 Woodruff J             Cav   4 B   Feb 24
  12779 Woods Thomas                13 B   Mch 15
   8190 White J, S’t           Cav   7 A  Sept  8 64
   5669 Wilson Wm A                  6 A   Aug 14
   4717 Westbrook J H          Cav   6 A   Aug  4
   4793 Wilson J M              “   13 D   Aug  5
    383 Yarber Wiley                 5 I April  5
    878 Young James                  2 D   May  4
   1142 Young James                  2 F   May 16
     14 Yeront Samuel                3 E April 10
   5682 Yarnell J E                  3 E   Aug 14
    TOTAL 736.


VERMONT.

   3975 Averill T E                  9 I  July 25 64
   4579 Adams Dan’l            Cav   1 L   Aug  2
   8301 Albee S, S’t                11 G  Sept  9
   9960 Atwood A                     1 C  Sept 28
  10664 Aldrich L E, S’t            11 A   Oct 11
  11259 Aldrich H B            Art   1 A   Oct 21
  12092 Aiken M A                    1 A   Nov 19
  12766 Avery B F                    3 C   Mar 13 65
   2035 Bloomer J              Bat   2 -  June 15 64
   3166 Bailey James                 2 A  July 11
   4036 Brown George                16 B  July 20
   4173 Bailey S P             Cav   1 H  July 28
   4200 Beadle H H                   9 G  July 29
   4509 Bucker James                 1 M   Aug  1
   4637 Boyd A M               Cav   1 L   Aug  3
   4954 Bently M W                   6 A   Aug  7
   5671 Bacom A M                    8 G   Aug 14
   5728 Bliss J H              Cav   1 L   Aug 15
   6334 Burchard C                  11 L   Aug 21
   6349 Benson A                     1 C   Aug 21
   6416 Bennvills J                  4 D   Aug 22
   6594 Barnes W               Cav   1 F   Aug 23
   7886 Barton W                    11 K  Sept  5
   8029 Beady Wm                     9 I  Sept  6
   8086 Barker F               Art   1 A   Aug  7
   8315 Burrows H                   11 F  Sept 10
   8591 Brainard J B           Cav   1 L   Aug 12
  10305 Brown G                      9 B   Oct  4
  10371 Bowles L H                   7 A   Oct  5
  10431 Burton C                     4 A   Oct  6
  10745 Barker C                     4 D   Oct 11
  11068 Brown J B                    1 A   Oct 17
  11225 Batch B F                    4 C   Oct 20
  11375 Bohamar J                    9 I   Oct 24
  11469 Baker John                  11 E   Oct 26
  11747 Bonlon A                     2 B   Nov  2
  11841 Babcock T                    1 K   Nov  5
  12055 Barber W H                   1 C   Nov 16
  12185 Burns J                      7 B   Nov 28
  12239 Butler A F             Art   1 L   Dec  7
  12406 Baxter G                     4 A   Jan  6 65
  12412 Bishop E                    11 E   Jan  8
  12585 Bailey E                     4 B   Feb  4
   1044 Corey C A              Cav   1 F   May 12 64
   1170 Clifford Jas                 4 F   May 17
   1228 Chatfield Wm, Cor           10 F   May 20
   1973 Collit Jas             Cav   1 H  June 15
   2675 Caswell F                    9 -  June 30
   2694 Clough B                     9 A  June 30
   2811 Chase M                      6 H  July  3
   3351 Cole A H                     9 H  July 15
   3817 Crocker D                    5 D  July 23
   3918 Clough John D               11 A  July 24
   4205 Chamberlain ——               6 A  July 29
   4883 Crouse N                     5 C   Aug  6
   5103 Chester A                   11 K   Aug  9
   5480 Carey Thomas           Art   1 -   Aug 13
   6806 Carmine P               “    1 L   Aug 25
   6932 Conner W A, S’t              4 A   Aug 26
   7345 Clark M L                   11 F   Aug 31
   7361 Clark John             Art  11 M   Aug 31
   7698 Cunningham J           Cav   1 F  Sept  3
   8320 Cook J J, Cor           “    1 I  Sept 10
   8923 Chase E L              Art   1 C  Sept 16
   9724 Crowley D                   11 F  Sept 25
  11738 Cross E F                   11 L   Nov  2
  11769 Carter J                    11 A   Nov  3
  10330 Colborn W              Art   1 M   Oct  4
   3068 Drew F                 Cav   1 F  July  9
   5927 Donohoe P               “    1 D   Aug 17
   6104 Dunn G E, Cor                1 G   Aug 18
   6338 Doying F W             Art   1 F   Aug 21
   6840 Darcy F                      4 D   Aug 25
   7974 Day Geo                     11 H  Sept  6
   8271 Davis O F                    9 I  Sept  9
  10420 Dunn W W               Cav   1 G   Oct  6 64
  10458 Day J D                 “    1 A   Oct  7
  12375 Dragoon N               “    1 G   Jan  1 65
   6353 Ennison G                   11 A   Aug 21 64
  10316 Eliot C                      4 F   Oct  4
    821 Farmer E L                  14 H   May  1
   3464 Freeman C R                  9 H  July 17
   4077 Farnsworth M                 1 B  July 26
   5851 Farnham L B            Art   1 A   Aug 16
   5914 Foster A                    17 K   Aug 17
   6758 Fuller W               Cav   1 G   Aug 25
   7165 Forrest S                    3 I   Aug 29
   8096 Fox W                       11 K  Sept  7
   8201 Foster H B                  11 L  Sept  8
  10784 Feast Geo              Art   1 K   Oct 12
  10969 Fisk W P                     4 K   Oct 15
  11314 Farrell J H                  4 D   Oct 22
  11351 Flint O B                    4 D   Oct 23
  11458 Foster H C             Art   1 D   Oct 25
  12317 Ferand A               Art   1 B   Dec 21
  12322 Ferrett J                    1 K   Dec 23
  12065 Fairchild G L          Art   1 A   Nov 17
   6264 Farnham L D, S’t            11 A   Nov 20
   1730 Gelo A                       3 B  June  8
   5273 Green E                Bat   2 -   Aug 10
   8572 Gleason C W            Art   1 H  Sept 12
   9739 Gillman S A                  4 G  Sept 26
  11598 Graves J                    11 E   Oct 28
  12531 Gerry E B, Cor               4 H   Jan 26 65
   2176 Hubbard F              Bat   2 -  June 19 64
   3851 Humphrey J             Cav   1 A  July 14
   5218 Hall Benj                   11 A   Aug 10
   6145 Hyde E, Cor                 11 L   Aug 18
   6657 Havens E W                   9 H   Aug 24
   7394 Hazen W                      9 H   Aug 31
  10824 Hines L                     11 A   Oct 13
  10843 Hart S L                     2 -   Oct 13
  10910 Hudson J B                  11 A   Oct 14
  10996 Hudson J M                  11 A   Oct 16
  11442 Howard J               Cav   1 K   Oct 25
  11730 Holmes Joseph          Art   1 K   Nov  2
  11814 Howard J                    11 A   Nov  4
   1206 Hall C A                     1 A   Nov 17
  12300 Hodges J               Cav   1 H   Dec 17
   3309 Jones H L                    6 B  July 14
   3858 Joslin H                     1 B  July 24
   3886 Jordan A E                  17 A  July 24
   4690 Johnson D W                 11 H   Aug  4
  10183 Johnson John           Art   1 K   Oct  1
   4007 Knapp L                      1 G  July 25
   6968 Kelsey L C             Art   1 F   Aug 27
   7762 Kingsley S                   1 D  Sept  4
   8901 Knowles C W                  4 H  Sept 16
   6239 Knight Chas            Art   1 K   Aug 26
   4597 LaBoney H                    1 M   Aug  3
   4664 Larraway H                   5 A   Aug  3
   7653 Lapcam A               Cav   1 -  Sept  3
   7891 Laddenbush J                17 A  Sept  5
   8355 Leoport C                   11 L  Sept 10
  10180 Lungershaw W C         Cav   1 F   Oct  1
  11074 Lacker H                    11 A   Oct 17
  12916 Lumsden C              Cav   4 D   Feb  8 65
   1335 Mitchell Jacob         Bat   2 -   May 24 64
   1544 Mosey A                Cav   1 K  June  1
   2088 McIntyre John                7 F  June 17
   2394 Manian P                     9 -  June 24
   4617 Morse W                      1 F   Aug  3
   5073 Martin Jas                   1 M   Aug  8 64
   5949 Mills Wm                     1 E   Aug 17
   7324 Merrill B J                  1 B   Aug 30
   8475 Mayhim J                     6 C  Sept 11
   8965 Manchester J M          C    1 I  Sept 16
   9352 McGager J                    2 G  Sept 20
   9405 Montgomery O A              10 A  Sept 21
  11227 McAllister W B               3 I   Oct 20
  11735 Martin M               Art   1 A   Nov  2
  12631 Monroe A                “   11 L   Feb 10 65
   9901 Morgan Chas             “   11 M  Sept 27 64
   4478 McCrillis Edw          Cav   1 C   Aug  1
   7289 Milcher Wm                   9 F   Aug 30
   6559 Nownes Geo H           Cav   1 C   Aug 23
  11067 Nichols H              Art   1 A   Oct 17
  12283 Nelson S H              “    4 I   Dec 13
    704 O’Brien Wm                   1 H   Apr 23
   4300 O’Neil J M                  10 A  July 30
   3183 Plude John             Bat   2 -  July 11
   3243 Pev Jas                     17 D  July 12
   4981 Preston F              Art   1 -   Aug  7
   5135 Phelps H W                   9 H   Aug  9
   5605 Poppins Frank                3 I   Aug 14
   6586 Parmor E                     4 C   Aug 23
   7290 Park James             Cav   7 E   Aug 30
  10040 Pillsbury F             “    4 C  Sept 30
  10237 Paul John C             “    4 G   Oct  2
  11041 Page E                       4 I   Oct 17
  11307 Powers A                     4 H   Oct 22
  11992 Packard M G, Cor        A    1 A   Nov 13
  12198 Pike N N                     4 I   Nov 30
  12721 Perry A B                    4 H   Mar  3 65
   1888 Reed D W               Cav   1 -  June 13 64
   6699 Ransom Geo W           Art   1 L   Aug 24
   7697 Roscoe C                    11 H  Sept  3
   8138 Roberts J M                 11 K  Sept  8
   8173 Richards J             Cav   1 L  Sept  8
   9462 Raynor Louis            “    4 C  Sept 21
   9894 Ross H E               Bat  11 K  Sept 27
  11009 Reynolds F                  11 F   Oct 16
  11426 Raney A                      4 A   Oct 24
  11691 Rice F W                    14 F   Oct 13
  12519 Rouncervee E T               9 D   Jan 25 65
    648 Spoore W O             Cav   1 B   Apr 20 64
   2943 Smith J C                    1 H  July  6
   3382 St John A                   11 A  July 17
   4580 Seward O                     5 C   Aug  2
   5707 Skinner F A                  4 H   Aug 15
   5963 Stone Jas A            Art   1 H   Aug 17
   6640 Simons L                     1 G   Aug 23
   7509 Seaton T B                   4 F  Sept  1
   7810 Sweeney Henry               11 C  Sept  4
   7813 Sprout A                    17 F  Sept  4
   8444 Stockwell A                 11 H  Sept 11
  10696 Sanburn H                    4 G  Sept 11
  10811 Styles A B, Cor              4 K  Sept 12
  10897 Sheldon H              Cav   1 M  Sept 14
  11282 Sarlett L                    1 M   Oct 22
  11476 Swaddle W                    4 G   Oct 26
  11966 Sanborn M L            Art   1 A   Nov 11
  12266 Scott R O                    4 F   Dec 12
  12514 Shay J                 Cav   1 K   Jan 23 65
  12552 Sheldon G                    1 K   Jan 29
  12567 Stewart E W                 11 A   Feb  1
   5911 Scott Geo W            Cav   1 C   Aug 17 64
   8436 Suppes T E              “    1 K  Sept 11
   3784 Tuttle C S              “    1 F  July 22
   5833 Tatro Alfred                 9 F   Aug 16 64
   6587 Taylor H C             Art   1 L   Aug 23
   6659 Trow H                      17 D   Aug 24
   9374 Tanner H, Cor               11 I  Sept 20
   9574 Tolman W C, S’t             11 F  Sept 23
  11171 Taylor J W             Art   1 A   Oct 19
  11220 Thompson W A            “    1 I   Oct 20
   5693 Varnum E G J                11 F   Aug 15
   3177 Weller D                     9 B  July 11
   4376 Whitehall Geo                6 B  July 31
   4485 Wilson A                     6 B  July 31
   4585 Wilder L F                  11 H   Aug  2
   5075 Whitney A                    9 D   Aug  8
   5307 Warner Geo O                10 E   Aug 11
   5751 Woodworth S P          Art   1 H   Aug 15
   7063 Wells Geo A                  4 F   Aug 28
   7322 Wright ES              Art  11 A   Aug 30
   7689 Witt T                 Cav   1 F  Sept  3
   7920 Ward Alfred                 11 A  Sept  5
   8239 Watkins G C                  1 C  Sept  9
   9264 Woodmance G                 11 F  Sept  9
   9178 Welles C                    11 H  Sept 18
  10510 White A                     11 A   Oct  8
  10741 Webster W A, S’t             4 A   Oct 11
  11289 Wakefield J W                4 H   Oct 22
  11398 Woods J M                    1 F   Oct 24
  11783 Wheeler B                   11 K   Nov  3
  11840 Warden G                     3 B   Nov  5
  11865 Worthers S T           Cav   1 D   Nov  6
  12156 Willey J S             Art   1 A   Nov 25
   4533 Washburn Tru           Cav   1 D   Aug  2
    TOTAL 240.


VIRGINIA.

    824 Anderson A                   2 H   May  1 64
    876 Armstrong, S’t         Mil   8 C   May  4
    942 Ayers S V                   11 C   May  7
   1968 Armstrong G B                8 C  June 14
   2760 Armhalt W H, Cor            10 I  July  1
   5011 Armstrong J                  3 C   Aug  8
   5341 Arbogast C W           Art   1 C   Aug 11
   8865 Abercrombie W H             12 C  Sept 15
  11525 Allison G                    1 F   Oct 26
    221 Burns S A, S’t               8 C   Mar 29
    255 Brooks Samuel F             10 I   Mar 30
    448 Boone Jas              Cav   1 L   Apr  9
    756 Bennett L J                 11 C   Apr 27
    943 Brake J, S’t                 6 C   May  7
    980 Blackburn Geo               10 I   May  9
   1705 Bates T E                   11 F  June  7
   2518 Brown M                     14 E  June 26
   2627 Bowermaster S R         C    3 D  June 28
   3407 Bateman D P                  2 B  July 16
   4427 Barber Jas             Cav   1 F  July 31
   5495 Bishop J C                   3 C   Aug 12
   6706 Bearer P                    10 I   Aug 24
  10297 Boutwell O                   4 F   Oct  3
   7126 Beasley P                    9 G   Aug 28
   7909 Bogard Jno R, Cor           14 A  Sept  5
   8539 Batt M                      18 E  Sept 12
   9796 Butcher Peter               14 F  Sept 26
  10198 Broom J                Cav   1 B   Oct  2
  11090 Blessing P                  15 K   Oct 18
  11337 Bush H H                    14 B   Oct 23
  11411 Burton W B             Cav   6 A   Oct 24
  11669 Barnett J               “    6 K   Oct 30
  11924 Beach J F                   14 K   Nov  8
  12045 Boggs H C, Cor          C    6 E   Nov 16 64
  12414 Barton N               Cav   3 B   Jan  8 65
    110 Corbett L B            Mil   - C   Mar 23 64
    403 Carr Wm                      8 B   Apr  6
    835 Clendeman C L           C    4 D   May  1
   1032 Caste Jesse                  8 E   May 11
   1100 Coon Nathan                 14 K   May 14
   2013 Carrington Jas               2 A  June 15
   2235 Coffman F              Cav   3 A  June 20
   2560 Cunderson ——                 8 D  June 27
   2661 Carnes H                    10 E  June 29
   2817 Conrad P                     3 F  July  3
   2930 Cunningham J                 8 E  July  5
   3315 Cox T A, S’t           Cav   3 A  July 14
   4363 Cool J B, Cor           “    3 H  July 31
   4741 Crook E H, S’t               7 I   Aug  5
   5174 Cuppett J                    3 H   Aug  9
   5384 Covil Wm                     3 I   Aug 12
   6674 Clements L             Cav   3 A   Aug 24
   6809 Curtin B                “    4 B   Aug 25
   7091 Clark ——                     7 E   Aug 28
   7179 Cremones D                   9 D   Aug 29
   8990 Cook J                 Cav   7 I  Sept 17
   9406 Campbell O H                14 F  Sept 21
   9755 Christian J                 15 C  Sept 25
   9762 Catnill L                    9 B  Sept 25
   9967 Cobin J M                   14 B  Sept 28
  10598 Childs S P             Cav   1 C   Oct 10
  11561 Castle C H                   1 A   Oct 27
  11830 Cooper A H, Cor         C    7 I   Nov  5
  12174 Campbell B                  12 I   Nov 26
     24 Deboard H A                  5 G   Mar  8
    202 Douglas Geo                  8 C   Mar 28
    347 Dean Samuel                  5 H   Apr  2
    632 Defibaugh W R, Cor      A    1 G   Apr 19
    647 Davis S                      3 D   Apr 20
    843 Duncan J M                   5 D   May  2
   2081 Daly Jas               Cav   3 A  June 17
   3105 Duckworth W B               14 A  July 10
   3246 Dyer James                  10 I  July 13
   5507 Drake Samuel                 9 B   Aug 13
   5588 Dorsey A L                  15 K   Aug 23
   6745 Daner J                     10 I   Aug 24
   6936 Darsey M                     9 L   Aug 26
   6949 Dodd S, S’t                  9 F   Aug 26
   7092 Dunberger Geo                9 C   Aug 28
   8248 Divers G                    15 D  Sept  9
   8467 Dant Jno M             Cav   7 H  Sept 10
   8582 Dason N                 “    8 L  Sept 12
   9159 Dunn I                       2 K  Sept 18
  12235 Duncan Wm              Cav   6 C   Dec  6
  12807 Donohue S                    9 C   Mar 21 65
  12508 Doty John              Cav   6 A   Jan 23
  10975 Estuff Jno              “    1 L   Oct 12 64
    117 Fuller Irwin           Mil   - -   Mar 23
    613 Foster Charles K             9 H   Apr 18
    955 Fox H C, Cor                 1 D   May  8
   5765 Fawkes Wm                   14 D   Aug 15
   7203 Foster S                     8 A   Aug 29
   7941 Feather J B                 14 B  Sept  5
   8698 Feasley Leu            Art   1 -  Sept 14
   8723 Fusner J E             Cav   6 D  Sept 14
  10206 Freeborn R L, Ser           14 B   Oct  2
  10709 Furr E                      10 K   Oct 11
  11022 Fleming W W            Cav   6 A   Oct 16
  10314 Forth R                      8 D  Sept  3
   2485 Grey P                  Va   3 A  June 25
   2649 Greshoe M                   11 C  June 29 64
   2712 Golden J               Cav   2 G  July  1
   4738 Gordon S                     2 G   Aug  4
   6348 Guenant A                    2 I   Aug 21
  10581 Garton Wm, Cor               2 I   Oct 10
  11574 Gluck A E                   10 D   Oct 28
  11864 Gibson A                     1 A   Nov  6
     84 Hollingshead S               1 G   Mar  8
    294 Harrison D                  10 I   Apr  1
    365 Henry Robert O               8 C   Apr  2
    398 Hunter G W                   8 A   Apr  6
    568 Heller Wm, Cor               3 D   Apr 15
    839 Halpin Jno                   2 D   May  2
    997 Hoffman G W                  8 E   May 10
   1013 Hess J                      11 C   May 10
   1421 Hatfield J                   1 B   May 28
   1854 Harkins H                    2 F  June 11
   2702 Hoover W H                   3 A  June 30
   2902 Howell A                    14 E  July  5
   2957 Howe S                       2 I  July  5
   3980 Horant E A                   3 C  July 25
   4739 Hine Wm                      2 A   Aug  5
   5061 Hammer S               Cav   3 G   Aug  8
   5412 Hartley Isaac                3 I   Aug 12
   5649 Hall Henry                  10 F   Aug 14
   6538 Harper W                     8 H   Aug 23
   8061 Hushman W                   10 I  Sept  7
   8268 Hardway D B                  9 G  Sept  9
   8341 Harden G W             Cav   6 A  Sept 10
   8344 Hutson J                    14 A  Sept 10
   9166 Hanslan B              Cav   6 -  Sept 18
   9537 Hudgins J                   14 B  Sept 22
   9794 Handland H                   1 H  Sept 26
  10990 Hollinbeck W H, Cor     C    1 B   Oct 14
  11316 Hubert W C                  12 G   Oct 22
  11396 Hendershot F F               7 E   Oct 24
  11739 Hurn R                       8 E   Nov  2
  12014 Hartzel S                    1 D   Nov 15
  12153 Hickman E                   11 B   Nov 24
    312 Johns E K              Mil   8 C   Apr  2
   3045 Jake A R                     8 I  July  8
   3969 Jackson S E                  2 E  July 25
   6098 Jones G                Cav   2 D   Aug 18
   7681 Johnston I A            “    1 D  Sept  3
   8371 Jenkins W              Art   1 D  Sept 10
    323 Kane J                 Cav   4 L   Apr  2
   5822 Kimball Jno                 14 K   Aug 16
    589 Ludihing W                   2 A   Apr 17
   1565 Langstan N H           Cav   1 A  June  2
   1592 Lanham Henry                 8 C  June  3
   1949 Logger J               Cav   3 B  June 14
   2734 Lyshon Wm                    2 I  July  1
   2739 Loud Geo                     9 D  July  1
   6924 Lansbury W, Ser             15 E   Aug 26
   7237 Lough H                Cav   1 L   Aug 29
  10564 Liston David            “    6 C   Oct  9
  10569 Lowe J                       9 C   Oct  9
  11021 Lowe W G                    13 G   Oct 16
  11325 Layman W F                  14 C   Oct 23
  11624 Laughlin D, Cor              9 E   Oct 28
  11989 Lucas J                      9 D   Nov 13
  12262 Loring J               Art   1 D   Dec 12
     41 Maddons W L            Cav   4 K   May  3
    280 Mason Peter                 10 G   Apr  1
    387 Magaher J              Cav   3 A   Apr  5
    422 McNeily Jas             “    3 A   Apr  7
    582 McCormick R                  - F   Apr 16
    786 McConnaughy D               11 F   Apr 28 64
    820 McGitton J                   6 G   May  1
   1068 Morris J M             Cav   3 E   May 13
   1419 Murphy J                     8 D   May 28
   1675 Moore M                     14 K  June  6
   2932 Millum Jas                   8 I  July  5
   3955 Mokie R                Cav   7 -  July 20
   6960 Miller C W                   2 C   Aug 27
   7018 Meiner H                    12 I   Aug 27
   9699 Mencar L B                  14 B  Sept 24
   9767 Morris G                    14 A  Sept 25
   9955 Miller D                    14 C  Sept 28
  10567 Moody R W              Cav   6 E   Oct  9
  10578 McKinney Wm             C    1 L   Oct  9
  10934 McConkey A, Cor         C    6 B   Oct 14
  10970 McLaughlin R           Art   1 D   Oct 15
  11546 Monsen J F                  14 C   Oct 27
  12099 Matt Henry                  12 E   Nov 19
  12272 McCausland R                 1 G   Dec 12
   9488 McGregor P                   1 E  Sept 21
  12068 McWilson J                  14 F   Nov 17
   2857 Norman H                     2 I  July  4
   3395 Newman A               Cav   1 B  July 16
   6442 Nichols L D                  9 F   Aug 22
  12472 Nicholson J            Cav   3 B   Jan 17 65
    241 Oxley Robert                14 C   Mar 30 64
   1767 Osborne Thos                 5 H  June  9
     39 Packard Myron C         C    2 I   Mar 13
   1707 Peterfield Jno               4 F  June  7
   2433 Porrellson C D              10 I  June 24
   2645 Patney J                     8 G  June 29
   2737 Painter C, Ser               9 F  July  1
   3055 Petit J, Cor           Cav   1 L  July  9
   4707 Paine M, Cor                 8 F   Aug  3
   5004 Pugh L                       3 I   Aug  8
   5213 Pollend Jno                 10 I   Aug 10
   6004 Polley J                     8 C   Aug 17
   6196 Perkins James A             12 K   Aug 19
  11267 Palmer Jno, Ser         C    1 L   Oct 21
    349 Reakes Wm              Mil   8 C   Apr  2
    521 Rice A                 Cav   - G   Apr 13
    560 Randall Jas A                9 K   Apr 15
    959 Rinker F A             Cav   3 A   May  8
   1040 Robb M                       2 A   May 12
   1916 Richards G L                14 D  June 14
   3459 Rummer L                     5 A  July 17
   3465 Read J                      12 B  July 17
   3641 Redden J                     9 F  July 20
   4163 Ronsey Wm                    9 C  July 29
   7257 Rutroff Jacob                7 H  July 30
   8082 Reush Jas                    7 B  Sept  7
  10527 Reed J M, Cor               12 B   Oct  7
  11518 Rock J H                    12 C   Oct 26
  11794 Raleigh S              Cav   1 I   Nov  4
   7005 Richardson W                14 K   Aug 27
    273 Sayre Michael               14 I   Mar 31
    680 Sprague Geo                 11 F   Apr 23
    927 Stackleford S          Cav   3 A   May  7
   1510 Scott Z, Ser                 8 D   May 31
   2226 Steward C              Cav   2 I  June 20
   2359 Stagg Wm                    10 I  June 23
   2437 Stutter J N            Cav   3 B  June 25
   2931 Skillington G           “    4 D  July  5
   3321 Stephenson A            “    1 B  July 16
   3588 Shilber C A                  3 A  July 19
   3747 Shaub F                      2 E  July 22
   3895 Simons C E                   8 C  July 24
   3865 Stewart Wm A                14 I  July 25 64
   4463 Steele A               Cav   2 C   Aug  1
   4812 Snider S                     3 K   Aug  5
   4935 Sturn E E                   12 F   Aug  7
   5130 Smith ——                     2 F   Aug  8
   5237 Simmons E                    8 C   Aug 10
   5727 Sprouse A                   11 F   Aug 15
   5975 Smith J W                    8 G   Aug 17
   6473 Sprouse W                   11 F   Aug 22
   6610 Squares Sam’l          Cav   6 D   Aug 23
   7091 Stratton B B           Art   1 F   Aug 28
   7944 Stoker S               Cav   3 C  Sept  5
   8011 Sands Wm                    10 F  Sept  6
   8164 Scritchfield W               6 F  Sept 18
   8390 Stuck H M                   14 B  Sept 10
   8516 Smith B                      9 H  Sept 12
   8646 Sturgiss W T, D’m           14 B  Sept 12
   9217 Smith G H              Cav   7 G  Sept 19
   9714 Sullivan E                   2 A  Sept 25
   9786 Snyder J V, Ser              3 D  Sept 26
   9872 Semeir G S             Cav   4 -  Sept 27
   9906 Sands G W                    1 -  Sept 28
  10151 Smith J                     14 B   Oct  1
  11276 Smith J A                    9 B   Oct 22
  11625 Slee R, Ser            Cav   1 D   Oct 25
  11824 Spaulding F             “    1 A   Nov  5
  11836 Stockwell C H                3 B   Nov  5
   7291 Saylor C M                   9 B   Aug 30
   1108 Thatcher J P                 2 A   Apr 15
   3404 Trobridge S                  6 B  July 16
   5136 Tyom T                       8 H   Aug  8
   6379 Thurston C C                 1 I   Aug 21
   8663 Taylor J                     8 G  Sept 13
  12332 Thorpe S S                   3 I   Dec 26
   3846 Tomlinson S, Ser             3 I  July 24
   8119 Tatro L                     11 B  Sept  8
    244 Vincent Jas                  8 C   Mar 30
    814 Very W                 Cav   1 C   Apr 30
   1149 Vanscoy A, Cor          “    3 E   May 16
   1322 Virts R                 “    3 A   May 23
    945 Wilson Walter               11 F   May  7
   1757 Weaver M               Cav   1 C  June  7
   2854 Warp J                       3 F  July  6
   3723 Wich J                 Cav   1 L  July 21
   3925 Whitney W A                  8 F  July 25
   3996 Whit A                       5 F  July 25
   7542 Wilson J                     3 B  Sept  2
   7832 Warwicke E                   2 D  Sept  4
   8598 Wells E                      7 F  Sept 12
   9626 Wolfe C                     14 B  Sept 24
  10854 White J N              Cav   6 C   Oct 13
    148 Young A                      8 C   Mar 25
    456 Young A B                    8 C   Apr  9
    694 Young Ed               Cav   8 C   Apr 23
    TOTAL 288.


WISCONSIN.

   2113 Allwise J R                 24 E  June 17 64
   4477 Austin Isaac                25 G   Aug  1
   5241 Abbott A, Ser               21 D   Aug 10
   5453 Allen C P                    2 G   Aug 12
   8692 Adams A F                   36 F  Sept 14
  10830 Adams P                     10 A   Oct 13
  11492 Aultin E V, Cor             13 E   Oct 26
  12728 Antone C                    31 D   Mar  4 65
   1341 Bower H                      1 A   May 24 64
   1838 Burk O                      15 B  June 11 64
   2009 Bawgarder B                  2 K  June 15
   2055 Ball A                       7 A  June 16
   2128 Bowhan H A, Ser             10 F  June 18
   2334 Brooks E               Cav   1 H  June 22
   2451 Broomer B F, Cor            10 I  June 25
   2681 Brown O                     15 G  June 30
   3253 Brown J                      4 H  July 13
   3673 Bruce H                     24 H  July 20
   4870 Brumsted G, Ser             15 A   Aug  6
   5026 Briggs H               Cav   1 L   Aug  8
   5100 Budson John             “    1 L   Aug  9
   5164 Bemis H                     10 C   Aug  9
   5322 Briggs E               Cav   1 -   Aug 11
   5564 Bailey W, Cor               25 E   Aug 13
   6204 Banick S                    17 I   Aug 19
   7295 Bailey J                    36 I   Aug 30
   7323 Burk J                 Cav  10 E   Aug 30
   7755 Borden E, Cor               21 K  Sept  3
   7759 Boyle P                     25 D  Sept  4
   8576 Batchelder J                 1 I  Sept 12
   8641 Bushell C C                  2 B  Sept 13
   9607 Brinkman J                   2 A  Sept 23
  10686 Britton H, S’t              15 I   Oct 11
  10919 Bohnsen N                   15 I   Oct 14
  11754 Butler M                    10 K   Nov  2
  12032 Blakeley R                   7 F   Nov 15
  11610 Batterson L                 10 K   Oct 28
   2360 Church A                     7 H  June 23
   2663 Chapman J                    2 G  June 29
   2969 Cowles D                    10 B  July  6
   3292 Cummings S                  21 A  July 14
   3828 Crane R, Drummer             7 D  July 23
   4390 Chapel C                     1 E  July 31
   5102 Cavanaugh John          C    1 H   Aug  9
   8105 Chase F M, Cor               1 A  Sept  7
   9418 Currier C C                 21 F   Aug 22
   9169 Carlintyre G                23 -  Sept 18
  10752 Castle C               Cav   1 C   Oct 12
  11020 Cofam W                     10 A   Oct 16
  11088 Chusterson F                15 E   Oct 18
  11535 Chamberlain J               21 I   Oct 27
  11744 Clark W C                   10 E   Nov  2
  10346 Crommings H                  7 C   Oct  5
   1591 Duffey E                     1 L  June  3
   2522 Damhocker E                 26 I  June 26
   3244 Daggo John             Cav   1 L  July 13
   5830 Destler Fred                26 G  July 16
   6967 Dick Benjamin               36 G   Aug 27
   7455 Davis J                     36 B  Sept  1
   8530 Decker G, S’t          Bat   - F  Sept 12
   8587 Depas A                     21 A  Sept 12
   8900 Doryson W                    7 C  Sept 15
   9739 Dacy G                      12 1  Sept 25
  10771 Davis John                   1 B   Oct 12
  12750 David D P                   25 B   Mar  8 65
   2419 Enger J                     15 K  June 24 64
   5247 Egan John                    7 A   Aug 10
   6160 Erickson C                  15 B   Aug 19
   8601 Ellwood S, S’t              10 C   Aug 13
   9337 Erricson S                  50 D  Sept 20
  11687 Ellenger P                  21 K   Oct 31
  12286 Enkhart H                   36 G   Dec 14
     36 Fordway G W                  7 E   Mar 12
   1260 Fuller C W, Cor              7 E   May 21
   2283 Fountain W F                10 A  June 20
   5007 Forslay W K                  8 K   Aug  8
   5759 Flenis Oscar           Cav   1 H   Aug 15 64
   5811 Fisk J B, S’t           “    1 H   Aug 16
   6097 Fischnor D, S’t             36 H   Aug 18
   6236 Fanon Wm                     1 A   Aug 20
   8460 Farnham M B                  4 K  Sept 11
   9664 Ferguson I                  15 G  Sept 24
  10234 Fagan M                     15 G   Oct  2
  12618 Frost A                      7 B   Feb  2 65
  12653 Ferguson W R                24 D   Feb 14
   1529 Gilbert I                   16 K   May 31 64
   2392 Grush Fred                  15 I  June 24
   3164 Guth H                       1 D  July 11
   3390 Greenman D                  21 K  July 16
   5557 Greenwall M            Cav   1 C   Aug 16
   7355 Grunds L                    15 I   Aug 31
   8326 Groupe D                     4 F  Sept 10
  10691 Gunduson H                  15 I   Oct 11
   6614 Goon Jno E                  36 -   Aug 23
    303 Helt Carl                   26 E   Apr  1
    710 Hale A C                    21 I   Apr 24
   1062 Haskins J                    1 E   May 10
   1655 Hoffland ——, S’t            15 K  June  5
   1673 Harvey D M                   1 I  June  6
   2384 Hanson J                    15 K  June 23
   2556 Hough B J                   10 K  June 27
   3720 Henderson O                 15 F  July 24
   4542 Hewick Nelson               10 B   Aug  2
   4570 Halts S                     26 C   Aug  2
   5312 Howard F B                  10 K   Aug 11
   5628 Holenback A                 25 D   Aug 14
   6468 Hall A W                    21 I   Aug 22
   7081 Hanley T               Art   3 D   Aug 28
   7149 Hutchins B             Cav   1 E   Aug 29
   7649 Hanson L                    15 B  Sept  3
   7791 Harding W F                 21 C  Sept  4
   8584 High M                      25 E  Sept 12
   9333 Halter D                    22 D  Sept 20
  10427 Hans P                      10 D   Oct  6
  11443 Holenbeck C                 13 A   Oct 25
  11927 Hanson ——                    1 B   Nov  8
  12167 Harris N                    12 D   Nov 26
  12586 Hardy E L                    6 E   Jan  4 65
  12848 Hanson R L                   1 F   Apr 28
  12468 Hand G                      10 D   Jan 16
   8614 Ingham J                    10 K  Sept 13 64
   9808 Irwin A                     25 C  Sept 26
   2003 Jacobson O                  15 D  June 15
   3281 Jackson T                    4 H  July 13
   3478 Jillett J                    7 H  July 17
   6938 Jennings J R                45 G   Aug  5
  11284 Johnson W H                  6 H   Oct 22
   1165 Kemmett J                    1 H   May 17
   2498 Kundson J                   15 E  June 26
   4133 Kellett Jno B               21 B  July 27
   4405 Kull L                      24 C  July 31
   4614 Klepps C H             Cav   1 E   Aug  3
   8592 Kendall W                   32 -  Sept 12
   9063 Keeroger Wm                 36 G  Sept 17
  10536 Kane F                      26 E   Oct  8
  10692 Knowles H                   21 D   Oct 11
   8299 Kinds M O                   21 A  Sept  9
   3009 Lack Peter                   7 A  July  7
   5397 Livingston J H         Art   3 E   Aug 12
   6642 Lansing G                   10 A   Aug 23
   7235 Lowe F                      16 G   Aug 29
   7522 Lawson M                    15 B  Sept  1
   8944 Laich F                     26 K  Sept 16
   9997 Latgen E                    15 A  Sept 29 64
   8977 Laich F                     26 K  Sept 17
   1752 Manger Jas                  24 H  June  9
   1896 Mulligan J                   1 I  June 13
   2732 McMann W               Bat   3 -  July  1
   2951 McCormick E            Cav   1 L  July  6
   2981 McKenzie J                   1 F  July  7
   3625 McLanlin C                  36 I  July 20
   4925 Mathison E N                 2 E   Aug  6
   5043 Many J                      24 D   Aug  8
   5163 McFadden H             Cav   1 F   Aug  9
   5683 Mortes B                    10 D   Aug 15
   5739 Main Henry                  30 F   Aug 15
   6231 McClury A                   10 I   Aug 20
   6377 Messer F                     5 B   Aug 21
  10289 Myers S                     15 G   Oct  4
  11936 Mulasky E                   21 B   Nov  9
   4289 Nelson R                    15 K  July 30
   4980 Northam S R                 10 C   Aug  7
   6090 Nichols Wm                  10 I   Aug 18
  10369 Neff Wm                     33 I   Oct  6
   3162 Olson O                     15 B  July 11
  11545 Ochle F                     26 E   Oct 27
  11931 Olston M                    15 B   Nov  7
    604 Palmer Jno                   7 C   Apr 18
   2535 Plum A                 Cav   4 K  June 26
   2847 Peterson A                  15 K  July  4
   3511 Picket T B                   1 F  July 18
   4340 Purdy M                     10 E  July 30
   6406 Pirisis J                   17 F   Aug 22
   7530 Purdee J                    10 I  Sept  1
   7893 Peterson S                  15 K  Sept  5
   8515 Pillsbury A J          Cav   1 H  Sept 12
   8654 Patterson J                 21 A  Sept 13
   9014 Painter H                   10 F  Sept 17
   9902 Patterson S                 15 I  Sept 27
   9461 Peterson C                  15 I  Sept 21
   2028 Roach A                     21 F  June 15
   3624 Renseler H                   2 G  July 20
   3665 Reynolers F S               10 K  July 20
   4997 Reed G                       1 K   Aug  7
   5792 Rasmusson A            Cav   1 L   Aug 15
   6088 Robinson Will               10 C   Aug 18
   9860 Rice J                       7 C   Aug 27
  11812 Randles J                   25 D   Nov  4
  12233 Richmond B             Cav   1 L   Dec  6
  12242 Randell P B             “    1 K   Dec  7
     68 Schleassen J J               7 F   Mar 19
    440 Shrigley H                  10 G   Apr  8
   2418 Stiffus R                   15 F  July  3
   3078 Sirbirth F                  24 E  July  9
   3503 Shoop W                      1 G  July 18
   3583 Sutton J                    10 B  July 19
   4343 Sharp J W                    2 G  July 30
   4378 Smith W F                   10 B  July 31
   4436 Shun J                      24 H  July 31
   4708 Scott E G                   21 D   Aug  5
   4882 Slingerland Jno        Cav   1 B   Aug  6
   6943 Starr E                     16 F   Aug 26
   7614 Seaman M                    21 D  Sept  2
   8168 Smith L                Cav   4 K  Sept  8
   9693 Snyder M                    26 E  Sept 24
  11037 Smith S M                   21 F   Oct 17
  11047 Sales A D                    4 K   Oct 17
   2148 Tung S W                    21 D  June 18
   2385 Tay S                        1 K  June 24
   2588 Tomlinson Robert             6 B  June 28
   3120 Thompson D D                36 B  June 10 64
   3375 Tyler J                     10 A  July 16
   3661 Tucker C P                   1 I  July 20
   4467 Taylor A L                  25 E   Aug  1
   6858 Taylor I                     6 E   Aug 26
   7160 Thorn P C              Cav   1 L   Aug 29
   8500 Troutman A                   2 -  Sept 12
  11236 Thurber D                   36 G   Oct 21
  11420 Tyler E P                   10 F   Oct 24
  11475 Thorson P                   24 G   Oct 26
  12374 Thompson O                  15 K   Jan  1 65
   2309 Updell J S                  15 B  June 22 64
   2954 Vohoss O H                   1 L  July  6
   3076 Vitter J                     6 F  July  9
   8359 Vancoster H            Cav   1 C  Sept 10
   8427 Vanderbilt J                36 D  Sept 11
  11390 Voclee F                    10 E   Oct 24
    929 Webster A C                  7 E   May  7
    884 Winleis P                    1 M   May  5
   1007 Wilder Jno             Cav   1 F   May 10
   1520 Welcome E D             “    1 L   May 31
   1693 Walter S P                  21 G  June  7
   1909 Welton M S             Cav   1 L  June 13
   2591 Winchester Geo              21 I  June 28
   2894 Weaver H                    10 F  July  4
   3378 Wens Chas                    7 B  July 16
   4706 Wakefield D                 25 K   Aug  4
   9484 Woodward W B                 1 -  Sept 21
   9938 Wick J                 Cav   1 H  Sept 28
  10213 Willis E                     7 E   Oct  2
  10395 Winchell S                   1 D   Oct  6
  12111 Whalen W                    12 B   Oct 21
  12363 Ward A                 Cav   1 C   Dec 31
  12626 Yessen A                    24 A   Feb 10 65
    TOTAL 244.


UNITED STATES ARMY.

   1798 Anderson A                  16 C  June 10 64
   3666 Atwell Thos, S’t       Cav   6 M  July 20
   4349 Allen Chas                  18 H  July 31
   4537 Aschley D B                 16 C   Aug  2
   6077 Arnold H                    18 H   Aug 18
   6089 Adams G                     14 C   Aug 18
   8069 Austin Jas, S’t        Cav   4 K  Sept  7
  11523 Annis Chas, (col’d)          8 I   Oct 26
   9250 Alfka A H              Cav   2 D  Sept 19
    102 Blossom Chas            “    6 E   Mar 22
   1122 Boughton M                  15 E   May 15
   1158 Bailey Andrew               16 K   May 16
   1199 Britner A                   16 K   May 18
   1201 Banks E E                   17 C   May 19
   1266 Burton Geo (col’d)           8 I   May 21
   1397 Bardon Chas S               15 E   May 26
   1442 Beal H                      15 C   May 28
   1461 Becker L                     2 B   May 29
   1762 Brown C                     16 D  June  9
   2122 Bates E L              Cav   5 E  June 17
   2434 Brannagan J                 18 D  June 24
   2436 Bigler N M             Cav   2 B  June 25
   2749 Bradshaw H             Mar   - -  July  1
   3370 Bush W                      15 E  July 15
   4861 Baldwin G                   19 A   Aug  6
   4669 Baker F                Sig   - -   Aug  7
   5657 Boyd S, Cor                  4 C   Aug 14
   5774 Breen A                      2 F   Aug 15
   6126 Boyd John B                  4 K   Aug 19
   6628 Bradman A M, S’t       Cav   6 M   Aug 23 64
   6652 Burd W H                     6 E   Aug 23
   6937 Bowers J                     4 K   Aug 26
   7717 Burk Jas                     1 K  Sept  3
   7921 Brossessault M         Art   2 M  Sept  5
   8909 Banvall J                    4 F  Sept 16
   9477 Bartlett E K           S S   2 D  Sept 21
   9631 Barstow J                   18 D  Sept 24
   9848 Barrett J                   18 D  Sept 27
  10621 Britzer L B, Cor            15 C   Oct 10
  11577 Brown J                     12 H   Oct 28
  11706 Brickley H                   1 K   Nov  1
  12077 Ball W                      12 C   Nov 18
  12112 Boyer J                Cav   1 K   Nov 21
  12564 Bromley J                   18 G   Jan 31 65
    760 Chisholm J M, S’t      Mar   - -   Apr 27 64
   1947 Clemens D                    6 L  June 14
   2174 Clemburg J                  16 D  June 19
   2216 Cassman A              Mar   - -  June 20
   2726 Carter Thos                 15 H  July  1
   3126 Cavanaugh P                 16 A  July 10
   3500 Conden H                    12 A  July 18
   3911 Crookey S, Cor              15 H  July 24
   4346 Chase V                     16 C  July 30
   4930 Campbell S L                15 C   Aug  7
   5107 Croy J                      18 B   Aug  9
   5156 Cussey Jas                  15 A   Aug  9
   5234 Casey J                     15 A   Aug 10
   5436 Champney P A           Sig   - -   Aug 12
   6420 Cammell J                   12 H   Aug 22
   7532 Coolidge M                  17 B  Sept  1
   7722 Connor H                    15 H  Sept  3
   7906 Corst Jas                   14 D  Sept  5
   8161 Connell J                   14 D  Sept  8
   8243 Chamberlain C               17 B  Sept  9
   8570 Collins M              Cav   4 H  Sept 12
   8767 Carter C A                   1 B  Sept 14
   9034 Clifford J             Cav   6 B  Sept 17
   9113 Chase L                     10 C  Sept 18
   9186 Carroll L              Cav   2 G  Sept 18
   9295 Congreve E                   5 A  Sept 19
   9482 Cuyler W                    16 B  Sept 21
   9814 Crocker Chas                 2 A  Sept 26
  10210 Corgill C                   12 F   Oct  2
  10557 Clark R W              S S   2 -   Oct  9
  11176 Casey Jno                   19 A   Oct 19
  11201 Childs G                    16 B   Oct 20
  11633 Cramer A, S’t               19 C   Oct 28
    914 Dunn Jno                     6 A   May  6
    910 Dangler W G                  5 M   May  5
   1255 Doney J W              Cav   6 D   May 21
   1653 Dunn Wm                     19 F  June  5
   2274 Dunn Jno                    18 H  June 20
   2495 Donalan M              Cav   2 L  June 26
   3025 Deyer H, S’t                18 D  July  7
   4377 Darwin W W             S S   2 B  July 31
   4490 Dinslow B F                 12 G   Aug  1
   4626 Delaney Jacob          Art   5 F   Aug  3
   5348 Doll R                      14 C   Aug 11
   5459 Dolan P                     19 F   Aug 12
   5756 Davis G, Cor                19 A   Aug 15
   6025 Decker Jas                  10 -   Aug 18
   6210 Davis J W, Cor              15 E   Aug 19
   6297 Doran J M                   19 E   Aug 20
   6770 Doughty D B            Art   3 C   Aug 25
   6805 Davidson J H                15 C   Aug 25
   6955 Delaney E                   19 F   Aug 26
   7049 Davis G                     15 F   Aug 27 64
   7241 Delaney J                    2 F   Aug 29
   7792 Dean Samuel            Cav   4 B  Sept  3
   8214 Downing M                   10 D  Sept  8
   8832 Donle J                     10 D  Sept 15
  10235 Davis Clarke           Bat   1 K   Oct  2
  10883 Draper L                    14 F   Oct 14
  11554 Davy H                      18 G   Oct 27
  11613 Diller O M             Cav   5 I   Oct 28
  12140 Drummond J                  18 F   Nov 23
  12591 Dunn C                      15 C   Feb  4 65
   5648 Evans T                     14 F   Aug 14 64
   6813 Edwards Wm, (neg)            8 A   Aug 25
   7576 Erick J                      2 K  Sept  2
   7616 Ellerton N                  16 D  Sept  2
  12689 Emmich                 S S   5 C   Feb 22 65
     42 Ferguson J             Cav   6 E   Mar 15 64
   1243 Fitzgibbons Thos             2 C   May 20
   1509 Ferrell J                   12 A   May 31
   2355 Fifley H                    18 E   May 23
   2888 French Geo, 1st Lt          37 -  July  3
   3007 Feed G                 Cav   6 D  July  7
   3256 Frenchy D                    2 F  July 13
   3543 Fielding A                  13 E  July 18
   5487 Fliestine S                 16 C   Aug 13
   6804 Felps Dan’l, (negro)         8 H   Aug 25
   7167 Flanigan M                   2 I   Aug 29
   8536 Faunton H                   14 F  Sept 12
   9154 Flanery M              Cav   1 H  Sept 18
   9725 Frum E                  “    3 C  Sept 25
   9983 Flarety O                   16 -  Sept 29
  10655 Fenall J                    14 G   Oct 11
  10839 Flanagan P             Cav  14 D   Oct 13
  11402 Fritz A, S’t                19 A   Oct 24
  12312 Foster J                     4 H   Dec 19
    272 Gilligan Mat, Cor            1 I   Mar 31
   1639 Gardener C             Sig   - -  June  5
   2801 Gutterman S, S’t            16 D  July  2
   4977 Gray Wm                     18 C   Aug  7
   6182 Gale Walter                 11 F   Aug 19
   7220 Gulvere David                4 C   Aug 29
   8057 Griffith S                  11 F  Sept  7
   8671 Gunter Jno             Cav   4 -  Sept 13
   8857 Grace Thos                   1 B  Sept 15
   9851 Gilbert A                    5 K  Sept 27
  12066 Getts F                     19 E   Nov 16
   7335 Golton R                    76 B   Aug 30
    397 Hatch T C                   11 A   Apr  6
    533 Halbert F                    2 H   Apr 13
   1547 Halpin P               Art   5 H  June  1
   1585 Haney H                     16 D  June  3
   1608 Hurman J H             Cav   4 E  June  4
   2096 Hendricks J                 16 D  June 17
   2209 Hogan M                     16 A  June 20
   2706 Henry Wm                     2 B  June 30
   2730 Hurley D               Mar   - -  July  1
   2987 Hulit Wm                    16 D  July  7
   3753 Hill Geo                    17 H  July 22
   3893 Hopkins W, (neg)            17 C  July 24
   4429 Hill D S, (negro)           16 C  July 31
   7238 Heddington W                15 F   Aug 29
   7405 Horsham J R                 15 G   Aug 31
   8004 Halley J                    13 B  Sept  6
   9104 Hook H                      19 F  Sept 18
   9155 Heir J                      14 A  Sept 18
   9665 Hildreth Jas                12 -  Sept 24
   9918 Haney J                     12 C  Sept 28
  10054 Hasler C                    13 M  Sept 30 64
  10439 Hirchfield G           Mar   - -   Oct  7
  10857 Harman J                    15 E   Oct 14
  11136 Hamilton S             S S   2 D   Oct 19
  12369 Hill M A                     2 G   Jan  1 65
  12601 Hoit E, (negro)             35 H   Feb  6
  10322 Hamman W H                  15 F   Oct  3 64
   5532 Imhoff I                    15 E   Aug 13
   7647 Ireland Geo                 14 E  Sept  3
  10472 Ireson I               Cav   4 A   Oct 11
   8125 Johnson P              Bat   2 -  Sept  8
   8366 Jones W                Art   1 K  Sept 10
  10319 Jones C B              Cav   1 H   Oct  3
  11923 Jerald W H, S’t             18 F   Nov  8
    495 Kingeny J                    1 K   Apr 12
    912 Kelly Jno                   16 C   May  5
   1662 Kain P F, S’t               15 A  June  6
   3256 Kenley D                     2 F  July 13
   3341 Kerkney F                   18 F  July 15
   3685 Kilbride J                  15 F  July 21
   4245 Kane Wm                     18 H  July 29
   4266 Kalkrath C                   3 I  July 29
   4271 Kelly D                      4 H  July 29
   4694 Kester J                    15 F   Aug  4
   5640 Kay Robert                   4 F   Aug 14
   5643 Kelly J                Mar   - -   Aug 14
   6271 Kochel J, Cor               19 G   Aug 20
   6577 Kelly Wm                     9 I   Aug 23
   6764 King I                       7 K   Aug 25
   7465 Kinney G W             Bat   1 D  Sept  1
   8261 Klinty H               Art   1 K  Sept  9
   8490 Kricks F                    14 C  Sept 11
   8527 Kripp J                     16 D  Sept 12
   9082 Knapp C                     11 A  Sept 18
  11268 Kain Pat                    15 A   Oct 21
  11767 Kelly J S                    2 D   Nov  3
  11949 Kennedy J                   12 A   Nov 10
  12205 Kahl Chas              Art   2 M   Dec  1
  12532 Kemp J W                     2 K   Jan 27 65
     55 Love Wm, S’t                 6 F   Mar 17 64
   2282 Larreby G                   16 D  June 20
   2774 Little J                    19 E  July 21
   3999 Lackey J                    16 B  July 26
   4453 Langstaff R                 10 F   Aug  1
   5711 Lake Horace            Cav   4 K   Aug 15
   5891 Lynch B                     18 E   Aug 16
   6116 Lattin E                    12 A   Aug 19
   6300 Lawrence C                  11 E   Aug 20
   6352 Lyons E                Sig   - -   Aug 21
   6561 Little R                    19 F   Aug 23
   9732 Larqdell Wm, S’t            14 A  Sept 25
  10317 Louby O                Cav   4 H   Oct  3
  10379 Lockwood H, (neg)            8 D   Oct  5
  11038 Lyons R                Cav   1 E   Oct 17
  11543 Lyman O S                   18 A   Oct 27
  11973 Lewis Wm P                   8 B   Nov 12
    180 McCoy Augustus               6 M   Mar 26
    267 McClellan J            Cav   6 D   Mar 31
    828 Mason C H                   12 I   May  1
    948 Murphy D                    12 B   May  8
   1012 McEvers T L                 13 C   May 10
   1043 McGuire J                    3 C   May 12
   1332 Murray Thos            Art   1 I   May 24
   1471 Mulhall Peter, S’t     Mar   - -   May 30
   1823 Marze Jas                   12 D  June 10
   1946 McLaughlin J                 2 H  June 14
   1965 McConaghy P            Mar   - -  June 14
   2444 Meadow Jno             Cav   6 E  June 25 64
   3054 Muller J               Mar   - -  June 30
   2920 Miller C H             Cav   6 E  July  5
   3054 McKinney J             Mar   - -  July  9
   3083 Maloney B                   19 B  July  9
   3950 Merkill Peter               14 H  July 25
   4712 Murch Wm                    11 C   Aug  4
   4823 McClintock J S              18 H   Aug  5
   4863 Martin M               Mar   - -   Aug  6
   5303 Martin J               Cav   1 K   Aug 11
   5364 McCann B                    12 B   Aug 11
   5456 Michols R              Cav   1 K   Aug 12
   5581 McLean P                    17 C   Aug 14
   5769 McCoslin Robt          Art   1 B   Aug 15
   6073 McDonald               Cav   4 E   Aug 18
   6081 McClair R                   11 G   Aug 18
   6313 Munson C                    12 D   Aug 20
   6407 Mulhern C              Cav   4 C   Aug 22
   6515 Mantle J M, Cor             15 F   Aug 22
   6851 Marston B              S S  51 G   Aug 25
   6973 McKinley E W           Mar   - -   Aug 27
   7341 McGuire J                   12 D   Aug 30
   8293 Munn W                      18 H  Sept  9
   8473 McGinnis A             Art   4 E  Sept 11
   9110 Montgomery C                13 G  Sept 18
   9231 McCoy J M, S’t         Mar   - -  Sept 19
   9368 Miller H               Art   2 -  Sept 20
   9472 Morris G J                  18 I  Sept 21
   9830 McDermott H                 18 E  Sept 26
  10135 Manning J                   15 A   Oct  1
  10321 McCoy J                      4 F   Oct  3
  10457 Mills A                     15 G   Oct  7
  10554 McCord G                    14 E   Oct  9
  10855 McGee P, Cor                 2 -   Oct 13
  11008 Murray Jas                  17 G   Oct 16
  12148 Mizner W               Sig   - K   Nov 24
  12151 Moran J                      4 F   Nov 24
   7341 McGuire J                   12 D   Aug 31
  12364 McGorren J                  17 C   Dec 31
   2876 Northrup H E                 4 H  July  3
   6803 Newcombe Jno                18 G   Aug 20
   6954 Nichols H, Cor              12 A   Aug 26
  10240 North Jacob                 15 A   Oct  3
  12386 Neise J                      6 F   Jan  2 65
  12833 Naff ——, Bugler        Art   1 B   Apr 16
  12790 Newel L                     18 G   Mch 17
   2368 O’Reilly Theodore, S’t       3 K  June 23 64
   7036 Ott Jno                     10 A   Aug 27
  11846 Osrans J               Cav   4 I   Nov  5
    492 Partridge J W          Sig   - -   Apr 12
   1607 Pace J F                    18 C  June  4
   1893 Pulliam Wm             Cav   1 -  June 13
   3219 Pigot J                Mar   - -  July 12
   3669 Ponter ——              Art   1 I  July 18
   4631 Pearson S C                 40 C   Aug  3
   5309 Pratt C E              Art   1 M   Aug 11
   5729 Pike Wm, Cor           Cav   5 G   Aug 15
   5731 Poulton Henry               19 A   Aug 15
   6392 Page J E                    18 B   Aug 21
   7008 Phillips C                  14 D   Aug 27
   7267 Pruet Jas M                 19 A   Aug 30
   7311 Plummer G              S S   2 D   Aug 30
   2611 Preston Jno            Mar   - -  June 28
   7752 Pratt J                      3 B  Sept  3
   9571 Post A                 Art   1 F  Sept 23
  10951 Palmer Wm E                 15 F   Oct 14
  11170 Pattit J S                  11 F   Oct 19
  12142 Puck C                      15 G   Nov 24 64
   4022 Quinback J                  18 G  July 26
     11 Ross ——                     19 A   Mch  5
    194 Rooney Mark                 14 F   Mch 27
    404 Reardon D                   13 G April  6
    702 Reynolds Edwd          Mar   - - April 23
   3355 Roney F J                   18 E  July 15
   3820 Ritzer Geo A           Cav   5 H  July 23
   4276 Robison W R             “    6 H  July 30
   4957 Rhodes A                    18 B   Aug  7
   5210 Rinkle Geo             Cav   2 G   Aug 10
   5934 Ronke J                     10 D   Aug 17
   7151 Richards Theo          Cav   2 D   Aug 29
   8438 Rogers Wm                   18 G  Sept 14
   9268 Reynolds D             Cav   4 C  Sept 19
  10792 Reilly J                     3 B   Oct  2
   2701 Rawson J                    16 K  June 30
    363 Striff Jno                   2 F April  2
   1236 Shelton C                    8 F   May 20
   1253 Spaulding Wm           Cav   3 B   May 21
   1295 Scripter C E            “    5 D   May 23
   1647 Sweitzer M                  19 H  June  5
   1714 Smith H W                   15 C  June  7
   2073 Stoltz ——, S’t              16 C  June 17
   2082 Smith Jas                   16 D  June 17
   2298 Styles J N                  13 A  June 22
   2550 Sumser J                    19 G  June 27
   3110 Spaulding Jas               13 B  July 10
   3114 Skinner L                   13 C  July 10
   3838 Smartkash C, Cor            15 C  July 23
   3978 Somers P               Cav   4 C  July 26
   4238 Seybert J S, Cor       S S   1 H  July 29
   4310 Smith Allen                  4 H  July 30
   4666 Striper M                   18 D   Aug  4
   5022 Sutgee F                    16 C   Aug  8
   5305 Sorg A                 Art   1 M   Aug 11
   5393 Swagger H              Cav   4 D   Aug 12
   5801 Sisson J                     4 D   Aug 15
   6620 Slaughterback B             15 H   Aug 23
   6833 Sutgen F                    16 C   Aug 25
   7377 Smith F                     14 E   Aug 31
   7606 Starr Darius, S’t      S S   2 F  Sept  2
   7874 Snider J                    11 B  Sept  5
   8839 Scott Jas H            Cav   2 B  Sept 15
   9215 Stansbury E            Mar   - -  Sept 19
   9514 Souls J H                   15 F  Sept 22
  10214 Sullivan T                  11 C   Oct  2
  11144 Schroder F                  15 C   Oct 19
  11301 Smith J                      8 D   Oct 22
  11333 Stanton R                   14 K   Oct 23
  11664 Spencer J H                  2 D   Oct 30
  11690 Shortman J                  14 E   Oct 31
  12186 Streeter J                  16 B   Nov 28
  12211 Stanton C                    2 I   Dec  2
     92 Tooley Michael              13 G   Mch 21
    489 Taylor Amos                 17 H April 12
   2603 Thompson Wm                 18 G  June 28
   2662 Truman J               Cav   5 D  June 29
   3466 Tyson E S                   14 B  July 17
   4716 Tredridge A, Musician       13 -   Aug  4
   7366 Taylor M D                  18 E   Aug 31
   7801 Turk H                      18 H  Sept  4
   8258 Thomas J               Cav   1 D  Sept  9
   8259 Trainer M                    6 F  Sept  9
   8279 Thomas L, negro              8 D  Sept  9
   9115 Taylor E, Cor               18 I  Sept 18
  11393 Topper J                    11 B   Oct 24
   7829 Unmuch C               Art   1 K  Sept  4 64
   3657 Volmore J                    3 K  July 18
   7042 Vancotten Wm                16 D   Aug 27
   7135 Vickery Wm                   1 H   Aug 28
  12041 Van Buren W H               16 B   Nov 16
   1259 Walker Wm                    6 D   May 21
   1299 Worster Chas B          C    5 -   May 23
   2752 White Thos                   1 D  July  1
   4023 Williams D                  18 D  July 26
   4248 Warner S                    16 E  July 20
   4306 Williams Jno                 4 D  July 30
   5425 Walmor ——                   10 D   Aug 12
   6125 Wickham G H                 16 B   Aug 19
   6637 Wills S                     15 E   Aug 23
   7048 Wright C S                  12 C   Aug 27
   7109 Wadsworth B H               12 C   Aug 28
   7254 Warner H                     2 D   Aug 30
   9105 Whitney J W, Cor       Cav   4 K  Sept 18
   9131 White Samuel                 8 F  Sept 18
   9677 Walker Jno, negro            8 F  Sept 24
   9854 Walter I                    17 B  Sept 27
  10355 Wigley E                    17 C   Oct  5
  10374 Waters ——, S’t               8 C   Oct  5
  10756 Waldo J M              Art   1 K   Oct 12
  11137 Williams C             Art   1 K   Oct 19
  11395 Wizmaker G                   2 M   Oct 24
  12009 Wilson C W                  15 A   Nov 14
  12027 Wise G B                     6 F   Nov 15
   6496 Yarger A                    18 -   Aug 22
   7101 Young Robt             Cav   1 K   Aug 28
  10754 Young F B              Art   2 M   Oct 12
  11373 Young J C                   19 A   Oct 23
   7793 Zimmerman J                 17 D  Sept  4
  10423 Zing P, S’t                 10 C   Oct  6
  10450 Zimmerman M                 14 I   Oct  7
    TOTAL 399.


UNITED STATES NAVY.

   2619 Atkinson A, Nepsia                June 27 64
   4698 Anker Geo, Norman                  Aug  4
   8071 Anderson C, Southfield            Sept  7
   2919 Bradley Jno,     “                July  3
   3475 Broderick W                       July 17
   5072 Bowers W H, W Witch                Aug  8
  12047 Boucher W, Shawsheen               Nov 16
   1914 Carnes Wm                         June 18
   2149 Conant G S, Southfield            June 18
   2580 Carter W J, Montg’y               June 27
   6201 Collins Thos, Southfield           Aug 10
   7144 Corbet E                           Aug 29
   7508 Connor J                          Sept  1
   9544 Culbert J                         Sept 23
    164 Dillingham J N, Housa’c            Mar 26
   6437 Duffney J                          Aug 22
   3086 Ellis J H, Columbine              July  9
   4134 Evans Jno, Shawsheen              July 28
   4462 Earl J H, Paym’r Stew’d            Aug  1
   5419 Foley Dan’l, Southfield            Aug 12
   4605 Green G C, Southfield              Aug  3
   8871 Goundy Thos                       Sept 15
   1087 Heald W, Canandaigua               Apr 14
   1469 Hunter Jno, Seaman                 May 30
   2215 Hilton Jno, Johana                June 20
   3448 Hodges L, Norman                  July 17
   3793 Hughes Benj, Wabash               July 22
   5875 Heald H H, Merchantm’n             Aug 16
   9284 Holas Thos, W’r Witch             Sept 19 64
   1432 Jones Wm, Underwriter              May 28
   2178 Jones Theo,    “                  June 19
   2206 Journeay Jno, Fireman             June 19
   6417 Jackson J, Shawsheen               Aug 22
   8291 Johnson G P                       Sept  9
   8858 James F A                         Sept 15
   9392 Johnson M                         Sept 20
  10218 Joseph F                           Oct  2
    602 Keefe Jno, Housatonic              Apr 18
    698 Kultz A T, Ward                    Apr 23
   1546 Kelley Jas, Underwriter           June  1
   3850 Kinney J, Water Witch             July 24
   7375 Lodi Jno                           Aug 31
   2813 Lindersmith E, Montg’y            July  3
   4201 Lawton Jas, Ladona                July 30
    135 Mays A H, Mate, Norm’n             Mar 29
   2452 McDonald Jno                      June 25
   2581 Moore A, Anna                     June 27
   3128 Malaby P, Montgomery              July 10
   3348 Murphy M J                        July 15
   3529 McDonald Jno                      July 17
   3804 Matthews J, Underwriter           July 22
   4208 McHenry D’l, Southfield           July 29
   4324 McCarty T, Housatonic             July 30
   4396 McVey K                           July 31
   4679 McTier J                           Aug  4
   4800 McLaughlin E                       Aug  5
   5485 Meldon J                           Aug 13
   6355 Marshall N B, Leipzig              Aug 21
   6571 McDermott P, Montg’y               Aug 23
   6825 Mathews W C                        Aug 25
   6917 McLaughlin B                       Aug 26
   7251 McGowan J, Powhattan               Aug 30
  11863 Maston J, Ratler                   Nov  6
   7824 Noe M                             Sept  4
   2227 O’Brien Wm                        June 20
   3208 Ottinger M, Water Witch           July 12
   3153 Page Lyman                        July 11
   5325 Parkham J C, Shawsheen             Aug 11
   9024 Peterson J                        Sept 17
   2460 Quinlan N                         June 25
   7867 Quade M                           Sept  5
   2207 Ragan John, T Ward                June 20
   4661 Raymond W,  “  “                   Aug  3
   5108 Roland Jno, Underwriter            Aug  9
   7003 Reynolds T J                       Aug 27
    169 Stark John                         Mar 26
   2010 Sullivan J, Underwriter           June 15
   2883 Smith Jno W, Southfield           July  3
   3261 Sampson J R, Nav Bat              July 13
   4611 Smith B N, Mendota                 Aug  3
   6592 Stanley Wm, Southfield             Aug 23
  11299 Smith Wm, Water Witch              Oct 22
   1713 Thomas Sam, Southfi’d,            June  7
   1851 Thomas Jno, Southfield,           June 11
   3757 Turner Wm,                        July  1
   4159 Trymer Jas, Southfield,           July 28
   7445 Tobin Michael,                    Sept  1
   8302 Ta B F, Southfield,               Sept 10
   1646 Willis J P,                       June  5
   3004 Wilson A, Southfield,             July  7
   3878 Williams M W,                     July 24
   4118 Willis M, Southfield,             July 28
   4198 Williams C, Aries,                July 29
   5820 Wordell G K,                       Aug 16
   5990 Warren W H,                        Aug 17
   6458 Wooley M,                          Aug 22 64
   7503 Walsh Jas,                        Sept  1
   8104 Welch V, Southfield,              Sept  7
  10565 West Jno, Southfield,              Oct  9
    TOTAL 99.


MISCELLANEOUS.

   1460 Addley A, Citizen                  Oct 25 64
    887 Amos J         Ringold Bat     F   May  4
   2977 Augar A                           July  7
    282 Bane S         Ringold Bat     A   Apr  1
   2072 Beatty D, Cor  Ringold Bat     F  June 17
   4327 Baker Jno, Citizen Teamster       July 30
   4904 Bennmar L                          Aug  6
   5747 Butterfield Jas, Citizen           Aug 15
   6100 Blair H, Citizen                   Aug 18
   6366 Bidwell C, Citizen Teamster        Aug 21
   8102 Burkhead W    Prunell’s Le        Sept  7
   9344 Blood G P                         Sept 20
   9591 Brogdin D C                       Sept 23
  10500 Bunt C, Citizen                    Oct  8
  10602 Bishop J, Citizen Team             Oct 10
  10963 Brown Geo, Cor    Bridge’s Bat     Oct 15
  12342 Boland Jas   Prunell’s Cav         Dec 26
    177 Cannon Wm, Teamster                Mar 26
    389 Campbell D       Ringold B     E   Apr  6
    431 Childers C H                       Apr  8
   1195 Cobb J, Citizen Team               May 18
   1881 Clark M, Citizen Team             June 12
   3399 Cable C, Citizen                  July 16
   3972 Cregger J F, Musician             July 25
   6315 Crowley Pat                        Aug 20
   9245 Carroll C, Team   Army Cor        Sept 19
  10485 Corbit J                           Oct  7
  10872 Carey Thos                         Oct 13
  11726 Collins, Cit Teamster              Nov  1
  12449 Carroll J, Cit Teamster            Jan 13 65
    752 Deems P        Ringold Bat     E   Apr 26 64
   2620 Delp Geo, Cit Teamster            June 28
   4334 Davis J, Citizen                  July 30
   5866 Danfirth Geo A                     Aug 16
   8202 Delmore W, Cit                    Sept  8
  11084 Dubin M, Cit Teamster              Oct 18
  11248 Delhanta Wm, Cit                   Oct 21
    182 England E                          Mar 27
   3923 Evans M, Cit                      July 25
      - Everett T S, Cit Md               Aug 30
    157 Freeman Jno                        Mar 25
    453 Fenley R, Cit                      Apr  9
   1116 Fannon A, Cit                      May 15
   2332 Faster W, Tel Operator            June 22
   2435 Farrell M, Cit                    June 25
  10478 Flickson J                         Oct  7
   4808 Fitzgerald ——                      Aug  5
   5078 Frank F M     Wilder’s Bat         Aug  8
   5609 Fox Henry, Cit Teamster            Aug 14
   7643 Ford P, Teamster                  Sept  3
   9084 Foucks H C    Keyes’ Ind C        Sept 18
  11315 Ferrall M C, Teamster              Oct 22
   2529 Gildea D, Cit                     July  1
   4115 Grogran D                         July 28
   4747 Gishart J                          Aug  5
   6139 Graham E, Citizen                  Aug 19
   7854 Gorb S                            Sept  5
   9747 Goodman J O                       Sept 25
  10672 Gillman John                       Oct 11
  11862 Goodyear F, Citizen                Nov  6 64
  10717 Graves Wm E                        Oct 11
    219 Heartless S                        Mar 29
    264 Hammond S, Teamster                Mar 31
    606 Hoffman Chas, Cit Team             Apr 13
   1274 Harkins John, Teamster             May 22
   2370 Hammond J, Cit Team               June 23
   3222 Hudson G W, Cit Team              July 12
   4244 Hughes P                          July 29
   6670 Hanmay D, Cit Teamster             Aug 18
   8055 Herriage J, Teamster              Sept  7
   8756 Harkins D S, Cor     M M B        Sept 14
   9006 Hyatt J                           Sept 17
   9051 Hulbert J H S                     Sept 17
   9297 Hall M               A A S        Sept 19
   9425 Hart Isaac, Cit Teamster          Sept 21
  10262 Hines Daniel                       Oct  3
  10331 Hopkins John                       Oct  4
  11934 Heckinbridge ——                    Nov  9
  12456 Harrington J, S’t                  Jan 15 65
   8722 Imhagg ——                         Sept 14 64
   4794 Jones Chas, Cit Teamster           Aug  5
   6854 Jacobs W C, Citizen                Aug 25
  12714 Johnson J, Cit Canada              Mar  1 65
   2203 Kingland W H, Cit                 June 20 64
   3515 Kerr E, Cit Teamster              June 18
   6273 Kins W H, Cit Teamster             Aug 20
   7864 Knight J B, Cit Teamster          Sept  5
   9467 Kellogg E L, Cit Springf’d        Sept 21
    546 Lee Jas, Cit Teamster              Apr 14
   1772 Lafferty Wm       Ring Bat        June  5
   3689 Lummo Rob’t, Citizen              July 21
  10353 Linton E       Ringold Bat         Oct  5
     76 Morton J B        Ring Cav     A   Mar 20
    203 McMahon Pat                        Mar 28
    220 Morrison F, Cit Teamster           Mar 29
    865 Mower W, Cit                       May  3
   2285 McAtie M, Teamster                June 21
   2432 Manning B F, Cit Team             June 24
   2373 McEnshon Peter                    June 23
   3450 Moyer J                           July 17
   4017 Messenger H M, Cit                July 26
   5387 Morland J S, Cit Team              Aug 12
   5996 McGee J                            Aug 17
   6380 McKenna F                          Aug 21
   8039 McGuire J, Cit                    Sept  6
   9135 Myers Jno                         Sept 18
   9247 McDonald J                        Sept 19
   9616 Munch Christian, Top Eng          Sept 23
  12535 McDonald H H, Cit Ohio             Jan 27 65
   6666 Monteith M, Cit Teamster           Aug 24 64
    184 Newton Wm, Teamster                Mar 27
   7074 Norton E, Citizen                  Aug 28
   8510 Nichols J, Team   Army Cor        Sept 12
   4190 Osborne J, Citizen                July 28
   5414 Oliver W W                         Aug 12
    719 Pringle Wm, Cit Teamster           Apr 25
   1855 Podzas L, Cit Teamster            June 12
   5920 Poole C                            Aug 17 64
   8893 Powers G, Citizen                 Sept 16
   9010 Potter S D                        Sept 17
   9366 Phillips B B, Teamster            Sept 20
  12354 Parker Jas, Cit Teamster           Dec 29
  10100 Parkhurst W L        M M B   1    Sept 30
    853 Quinn Jas, Citizen                 May  3
   5394 Quinlan P, Cit Teamster            Aug 12
   5768 Quinn ——, Citizen                  Aug 15
   3542 Reed A R, Independent             July 18
   3779 Rand J, Cit Teamster              July 22
   5986 Ronley J                           Aug 17
  10111 Rendig C H, Citizen                Oct  1
  10453 Ryan John, Citizen                 Oct  7
  11131 Reien R, Citizen                   Oct 18
  11703 Richardson J C       M M B   1 I   Oct 30
    449 Scott Blair, Citizen               Apr  9
   2431 Smith P,             M M B        June 24
   2440 St Clair Benj, Cit Team           June 25
   2552 Slater Chas, Cit Team             June 27
   2959 Spicer W, Cit Teamster            July  6
   3000 Stout Chas, Citizen               July  7
   3662 Shunk J, Citizen                  July 20
   4008 Smith H       Bridge’s Bat        July 26
   4843 Sawyer J D                         Aug  6
   9729 Stanton J, Citizen                Sept 25
  10815 Smays David                        Oct 12
    136 Thompson Jno, Teamster             Mar 24
   1531 Tullis L B G, Citizen             June  1
   2693 Thompson Geo                      June 30
   3409 Thomas J H, Cit Team              July 16
   3896 Taylor J W, Citizen               July 24
  12337 Tucer B, Citizen Indiana           Dec 26
   9397 Ulmgender G          M M B     C  Sept 21
   9497 Vankirk W      Ringold Bat        Sept 21
   9688 Vandier W M, Cit Phil Pa          Sept 24
    799 Wilkins A, Cor    Ring Bat         Apr 29
   1092 Welsh G L, Cit Teamster            May 14
   1121 White George, Citizen              May 15
   2784 Wilson D E     Ringold Bat        July  2
  10953 Weir ——, Cit Teamster              Oct 14
  11606 Woods R C      Knapp’s Bat         Oct 28
   4730 Wright Chas, Cit Team              Aug  4
   4869 Ward John, Cit Team                Aug  6
   9043 Williams F G                      Sept 17
  10075 Wentgel Thos                      Sept 30
   4127 Young Henry, Cit Team             July 28
  12246 Young D, Cit Teamster              Nov  8
    TOTAL 165.


MEN THAT WERE HUNG.

  1 Sarsfield Jno          N Y   144 -  July 11 64
  2 Collins Wm              Pa    88 D  July 11
  3 Curtis Chas        R I Art     5 A  July 11
  4 Delaney Pat             Pa    83 E  July 11
  5 Mun A             U S Navy          July 11
  6 Rickson W R       U S Navy          July 11




Recapitulation of Deaths by States.

  ALABAMA,                                15
  CONNECTICUT,                           315
  DELAWARE,                               45
  DIST. OF COLUMBIA,                      14
  ILLINOIS,                              850
  INDIANA,                               594
  IOWA,                                  174
  KANSAS,                                  5
  KENTUCKY,                              436
  LOUISIANA,                               1
  MAINE,                                 233
  MARYLAND,                              194
  MASSACHUSETTS,                         768
  MINNESOTA,                              79
  MICHIGAN,                              630
  MISSOURI,                               97
  NEW HAMPSHIRE,                         124
  NEW JERSEY,                            170
  NEW YORK,                            2,572
  NORTH CAROLINA,                         17
  OHIO,                                1,030
  PENNSYLVANIA,                        1,811
  RHODE ISLAND,                           74
  TENNESSEE,                             738
  VERMONT,                               212
  VIRGINIA,                              288
  WISCONSIN,                             244
  U. S. ARMY,                            399
  U. S. NAVY,                            100
  Citizens, Teamsters, &c.,              166
  Men that were hung by the Prisoners,     6
  Unknown U. S. Soldiers,                443
  Died in Small-Pox Hospital,             68

      TOTAL                   12,912


The following exhibit, as collated from the Hospital Register and
Prison Records, will be found to be as correct as any yet published:

_Total Number of Prisoners on hand at end of_

  APRIL, 1864,                        10,427
  MAY, 1864,                          18,454
  JUNE, 1864,                         26,367
  JULY, 1864,                         31,678
  AUGUST, 1864,                       31,693
  SEPTEMBER, 1864,                     8,218
  OCTOBER, 1864,                       4,208
  NOVEMBER, 1864,                      1,359
  DECEMBER, 1864,                      4,706
  JANUARY, 1865,                       5,046
  FEBRUARY, 1865,                      5,851
  MARCH, 1865,                         3,319
  APRIL, 1865,                            51


_Deaths in Stockade and Hospital during the Existence of the Prison._

  MARCH, 1864,                           283
  APRIL, 1864,                           576
  MAY, 1864,                             708
  JUNE, 1864,                          1,201
  JULY, 1864,                          1,817
  AUGUST, 1864,                        3,076
  SEPTEMBER, 1864,[B]                  2,794
  OCTOBER, 1864,                       4,590
  NOVEMBER, 1864,                        492
  DECEMBER, 1864,                        160
  JANUARY, 1865,                         190
  FEBRUARY, 1865,                        139
  MARCH, 1865,                           192
  APRIL, 1865,                            32

        TOTAL                        12,912

[B] The greater number of deaths in September and October, in
proportion to the number in prison, will be explained by the fact
that all the well men were removed from Andersonville in these
months, and none were left except the sick and wounded.


  Day and date of greatest number of Prisoners at
  Andersonville—33,114—August 8th, 1864.

  Day and date of greatest number of deaths, August 23d, 1864, 127.

  Number of Prisoners received during its occupation, 45,613.

  Daily average of deaths during its occupation, 29¾.

  Ratio of mortality per 1,000 of mean strength, 24 per cent.

  Mortality of 18,000 registered patients, 75 per cent.


_The Diseases of which the Prisoners died will be found in the
following classification_:

  Anasarca,               377
  Asphyxia,                 7
  Ascites,                 24
  Asthma,                   3
  Bronchitis,              93
  Catarrh,                 55
  Constipation,             5
  Diarrhœa, Chronic,    4,000
      “     Acute,        817
  Debilitas,              198
  Diphtheria,               3
  Dyspepsia,                2
  Diabetes,                 1
  Dysenteria,           1,384
  Erysipelas,              11
  Febris Typhoides,       229
  Fistula,                  2
  Fracture,                 1
  Febris Remittens,       177
  Gonorrhœa,                3
  Gangrene,               678
  Hydrocele,                1
  Hemorrhoids,              1
  Jaundice,                 9
  Laryngitis,               4
  Nostalgia,                7
  Nephritis,                4
  Phthisis,               137
  Pleuritis,               54
  Pneumonia,              321
  Paralysis,                1
  Rheumatism,              83
  Scurvy,               3,574
  Syphilis,                 7
  Scrofula,                 3
  Stricture,                1
  Sunstroke,               52
  Small Pox,               68
  Vaccine Ulcers,           4
  Gunshot Wounds,         155
  Unknown,                443
  Hung in Stockade,         6

      TOTAL       12,912


[Illustration: (decorative separator)]




A List of Officers Imprisoned at Camp Asylum, Columbia, S.C.

  Aldrich C S, Cap        85th N Y Vol
  Austin J W, L’t         5th Iowa Cav
  Alters J B, Cap         75th O Vol
  Albaugh Wm, Cap         51st Pa Vol
  Alger A B, L’t          22d O Bat
  Avery W B, Cap          132d N Y Vol
  Allender W F, L’t       7th Tenn Cav
  Adair W A, L’t          51st Ind Vol
  Albro S A, L’t          80th Ill Vol
  Adams J, L’t               “    “
  Allstaedt C L, Adj      54th N Y Vol
  Ahern M, L’t            10th W Va Vol
  Ahlert T H, L’t         45th N Y Vol
  Adams C A, Cap          1st Vt Cav
  Alban H H, Cap          21st O Vol
  Andrews H B, Cap        17th Mich Vol
  Apple H, L’t            1st Md Cav
  Anderson C S, L’t       3d Iowa Vol
  Allee A, L’t            16th Ill Cav
  Abernathy H C, A Adj        “     “
  Acker G D, L’t          123d O Vol
  Adkins P, L’t           2d Tenn Vol
  Aigan John, Cap         5th R I Art
  Adams J G B, L’t        19th Mass Vol
  Alexander E P, L’t      26th Mich Vol
  Anderson H M, L’t       3d Me Vol
  Anderson J F, L’t       2d Pa Art
  Anderson R W, L’t       122d O Vol
  Andrus W R, L’t         16th Conn Vol
  Abbey A L, L’t          8th Mich Cav
  Arthur J A, Cap         8th Ky Cav
  Arthurs S C, Cap        67th Pa Vol
  Allen S, Cap            85th N Y Vet Vol
  Adams S B, Cap             “  “     “
  Andrews S T, L’t           “  “     “
  Albright J, Cap         87th Pa Vol
  Abbott A O, L’t         1st N Y Drag
  Armstrong T S, L’t      122d O Vol
  Airey W, Cap            15th Pa Cav
  Appleget A S, L’t       2d N J Cav
  Allen Robert, L’t       2d N J Drag
  Auer M, Cap             15th N Y Cav
  Anshutz H T, L’t        12th W Va Vol
  Adams H W, L’t          89th O Vol
  Austin G A, R Q M       14 & 15 Ill V Bat
  Albin H S, L’t          79th Ill Vol
  Andrews E E, L’t        22d Mich Vol
  Alden G C, R Q M        112th Ill Vol
  Ashworth J H, Col       1st Ga U Vol
  Adams W C, L’t          2d Ky Cav
  Amory C B, Cap          A A Gen
  Affleck E T, Adj        170th O Nat Gds
  Alexander A H, Cap      103d Pa Vol
  Abbott E A, L’t         23d O Vet Vol
  Belger James, Cap       1st R I Art
  Baker S S, L’t          6th Mo Vol
  Butler C P, L’t         29th Ind Vol
  Baird J F, L’t          1st W Va Vol
  Bricker W H, L’t        3d Pa Vol
  Bick W C, Cap           62d Pa Vol
  Braiday Count S, L’t    2d N J Cav
  Bulon A, L’t            3d N J Cav
  Burdick C H, Cap        1st Tenn Cav
  Bartram D S, L’t        17th Conn Vol
  Brown J A, Cap          85th N Y Vet Vol
  Bradley A B, R Q M        “   “     “
  Butts L A, L’t            “   “     “
  Bowers G W, Cap         101st Pa Vol
  Benner H S, Cap           “    “
  Bowers G A, L’t         16th Conn Vol
  Blakeslee B F, L’t        “     “
  Bruns H, L’t              “     “
  Bryson R R, L’t         103d Pa Vol
  Burns S D, L’t            “    “
  Bierbower W, L’t        87th Pa Vol
  Beegle D F, L’t         101st Pa Vol
  Bryan J H, L’t          184th Pa Vol
  Berry A, Cap            3d Md Cav
  Bunting G, L’t          5th Md Cav
  Bascomb R, L’t          50th N Y Vol
  Baldwin M R, Cap        2d Wis Vol
  Blake, L’t              3d Me Vol
  Brown W H, L’t          93d O Vol
  Beard J V, L’t          89th O Vol
  Byron C, Cap            3d O Vol
  Banks B V, Cap          13th Ky Cav
  Burch J, Cap            42d Ind Vol
  Bailey G W, L’t         3d O Vol
  Brownell F G, L’t       51st Ind Vol
  Booker A H, L’t         73d Ind Vol
  Brown J L, L’t            “    “
  Barlow J W, L’t         51st Ind Vol
  Bath W, L’t             132d N Y Vol
  Bending H R, Cap        61st O Vol
  Bush J G, Cap           16th Ill Cav
  Blinn L B, Cap          100th O Vol
  Baldwin C W, L’t        2d N J Vol
  Bartley R, L’t          U S A Sig Corps
  Bradley G, Cap          2d N J Vol
  Brandt C W, L’t         1st N Y Vet Cav
  Bontin C W, Cap         4th Vet Vol
  Barrett D W, Cap        89th O Vol
  Brandt O B, L’t         17th O Vol
  Byers S H M, Adj        5th Iowa Vol
  Barker H P, L’t         1st R I Cav
  Boone S G, L’t          88th Pa Vol
  Bisbee L C, L’t         16th Me Vol
  Bisbee G D, L’t           “    “
  Button G W, L’t         22d Mich Vol
  Barker H E, L’t         22d N Y Cav
  Butler T H, Col         5th Ind Cav
  Bowen C D, Cap          18th Conn Vol
  Bennett B, Cap          22d N Y Cav
  Brush Z T, L’t          100th O Vol
  Bigley C H, L’t         82d N Y Vol
  Burns M, L’t            13th N Y Cav
  Bassett M M, L’t        53d Ill Vol
  Bortwick N, Cap         20th O Vol
  Brown C A, L’t          1st N Y Art
  Benson J F, Cap         120th Ill Vol
  Bospord W R, L’t        1st N Y Vol
  Burns J, L’t            57th Pa Vol
  Beebee B C, Cap         13th Ind Vol
  Barton J L, L’t         49th Pa Vol
  Buchanan W, L’t         76th N Y Vol
  Benson A N, Cap         1st D C Cav
  Barkley C, L’t          149th Pa Vol
  Blane W, L’t            43d N Y Vol
  Bristol J H, L’t        1st Conn Cav
  Burpee E A, Cap         19th Me Vol
  Bryant J W, Cap         5th N Y Cav
  Biebel H, Cap           6th Conn Vol
  Bixby H L, L’t          9th Me Vol
  Byrns J M, Cap          2d Pa R C Vol
  Barrett J A, Cap        7th Pa R C Vol
  Burkholder D W, L’t       “     “   “
  Beal E, Cap             8th Tenn Vol
  Bayard G A, Cap         148th Pa Vol
  Brun S, L’t             81st Ill Vol
  Brady W H, L’t          2d Del Vol
  Breon J, L’t            148th Pa Vol
  Bischoff P, L’t         6th U S Art
  Burnett G M, L’t        4th Ind Cav
  Blair B F, Adj          123d O Vol
  Boyce T W, L’t            “   “
  Breckenridge F A, L’t     “   “
  Boyd W J, L’t           5th Mich Cav
  Brown W L, L’t          17th Tenn Vol
  Burrows S W, L’t        1st N Y Vet Cav
  Brown S, A M Mte        U S Navy
  Beman W M, Cap          1st Vet Cav
  Boaz E P, Cap           20th Ill Vol
  Bryan G, Adj            18th Pa Cav
  Bath H, L’t             45th N Y Vol
  Beadle M, L’t           123d N Y Vol
  Bigelow A J, Cap        79th Ill Vol
  Borchess L T, Cap       67th Pa Vol
  Brown G L, L’t          101st Pa Vol
  Blanchard Geo A, Cap    85th Ill Vol
  Bradford John, L’t      4th N J Vol
  Borchess T F, L’t       67th Pa Vol
  Barnes O P, L’t         3d O Vol
  Bremen S, Cap           3d Mich Vol
  Brickenhoff M, L’t      42d N Y Vol
  Barse J R, L’t          5th Mich Cav
  Bliss A T, Cap          10th N Y Cav
  Buckley H, L’t          4th N H Vol
  Bader H, L’t            29th Mo Vol
  Blae J G, L’t           3d O Vol
  Boughton S H, L’t       71st Pa Vol
  Barnes A T, L’t         14th Ill Vet Bat
  Beasley J L, L’t        81st Ill Vol
  Baker H D, Cap          120th Ill Vol
  Burke T F, Cap          16th Conn Vol
  Barnes W J, Cap
  Bennett W F, Cap        39th Iowa Vol
  Bassett W H, L’t        79th Ill Vol
  Botts W O, L’t          10th Wis Vol
  Biggs J, L’t            123d Ill Vol
  Bennett F J, L’t        18th U S Inf
  Brown J C, L’t          15th  “   “
  Bryant M C, L’t         42d Ill Vol
  Butler W O, L’t         10th Wis Vol
  Brooks E P, Adj
  Barringer A, L’t        44th N Y Vol
  Ballard S H, L’t        6th Mich Cav
  Brown J H, Cap          17th Iowa Vol
  Byron S, L’t            2d U S Inf
  Blaire Geo E, L’t       17th O Vol
  Bishop F P, L’t         4th Tenn Cav
  Bowen C T, L’t          4th R I Vol
  Bateman Wm, L’t         9th Mich Cav
  Baird Wm, L’t           23d U S C T
  Barnum S D, Cap           “     “
  Biller J N, L’t         2d Pa Art
  Baker W F, Cap          87th Pa Vol
  Bowley F S, L’t         30th U S C T
  Boettger C, L’t         2d Md Vol
  Bogle A, Major          35th U S C T
  Barnard W A, L’t        20th Mich Vol
  Blasse Wm, L’t          43d N Y Vol
  Buffum M P, L’t Col     4th R I Vol
  Brown C O, L’t          31st Me Vol
  Beecham R K, L’t        23d U S C T
  Briscoe A M, L’t        Cole’s Md Cav
  Burbank H H, Cap        32d Me Vol
  Bearce H M, L’t           “    “
  Bittenger C L, L’t      76th Pa Vol
  Bartlett O E, Cap       31st Me Vol
  Braidey A J, L’t        54th Pa Vol
  Bell C A, L & A D C
  Burton R, L & A D C     9th N Y Art
  Beebe H E, L & A D C    22d N Y Cav
  Coleman S S, L’t        12th Ky Cav
  Chalfant J T, Cap       11th Pa Vol
  Call C H, Cap           29th Ill Vol
  Caswell H, L’t          95th Ill Vol
  Carpenter E D, L’t      18th Conn Vol
  Caldwell C, L’t         1st Wis Cav
  Cook A A, L’t           9th O Cav
  Casdorph C H, L’t       7th W Wa Cav
  Casler B G, Cap         154th N Y Vol
  Cook A L, L’t           2d Pa Vol
  Cusac J, Cap            21st O Vol
  Canfield S S, Cap        “    “
  Catin M, Cap             “    “
  Coffin Y L, L’t         31st Me Vol
  Chandler G A, L’t       5th Me Vol
  Coren J H, L’t          1st W Va Cav
  Culver F B, L’t         123d O Vol
  Carothers J J, L’t        “    “
  Claghorn A C, L’t       21st O Vol
  Carey S E, L’t          13th Mass Vol
  Campbell L A, L’t       152d N Y Vol
  Carnes W C, Cap         2d Tenn Vol
  Center A P, Cap           “     “
  Carroll E, L’t          11th Tenn Vol
  Carr C W, L’t           4th Vt Vol
  Cunningham J, L’t       7th Pa R C Vol
  Coslett C, L’t          115th Pa Vol
  Cooper R, L’t           7th N J Vol
  Crawford C H, L’t       183d Pa Vol
  Cromack S O, L’t        77th N Y Vol
  Correll H, L’t          2d Vt Vol
  Cornell C H, L’t        95th N Y Vol
  Cutter C H, L’t           “      “
  Creasey G W, L’t        35th Mass Vol
  Chute R H, L’t          59th  “    “
  Cross H M, L’t            “   “
  Chapin H A, L’t         95th N Y Vol
  Clyde J D, Cap          76th  “   “
  Cahill W, L’t             “   “   “
  Casler J L, L’t           “   “   “
  Chisman H, L’t          7th Ind Vol
  Cooper A, L’t           12th N Y Cav
  Cribben H, L’t          140th N Y Vol
  Curtis G M, L’t           “    “   “
  Caldwell J S, L’t       16th Ill Cav
  Caslin C S, L’t         151st N Y Vol
  Crossley S, L’t         118th Pa Vol
  Chauncey C R, Cap       34th Mass Vol
  Carlisle S B, L’t       145th Pa Vol
  Conover S D, Cap        125th Ill Vol
  Cole O L, L’t           50th Ill Vol
  Cain J H, L’t           104th N Y Vol
  Cassell E F, L’t        11th Iowa Vol
  Chambers J H, L’t       103d Pa Vol
  Cottingham E, L’t       35th Pa Vol
  Coddington J P, Vet Sur  8th Iowa Cav
  Cole A F, Cap           59th N Y Vol
  Curtiss W H, Adj        19th Mass Vol
  Clark J W, L’t          59th N Y Vol
  Clark J H, L’t          1st Mass Art
  Case D L, Jr, Adj       102d N Y Vol
  Cope J D, L’t           116th Pa Vol
  Cove J W, L’t           6th W Va Cav
  Coulter W J, L’t        15th Mass Vol
  Cubbetson W M, L’t      30th Ind Vol
  Casey J, L’t            45th N Y Vol
  Carter W H, L’t         5th Pa R C Vol
  Chittenden J L, L’t     5th Ind Cav
  Conney W H, L’t         69th N Y Vol
  Cameron P, L’t          16th N Y Cav
  Campbell W F, L’t       51st Pa Vol
  Cameron J F, L’t        5th Pa Cav
  Carr J P, Cap           93d Ind Vol
  Clegg M, L’t            5th Ind Cav
  Curtice H A, L’t        157th N Y Vol
  Coffin J A, L’t           “    “   “
  Collins W A, Cap        10th Wis Vol
  Carlisle J B, L’t       2d W Va Cav
  Christopher W, L’t        “    “
  Chandler G W, L’t       1st W Va Cav
  Chatburn J, L’t         150th Pa Vol
  Childs J W, L’t         16th Me Vol
  Chase H R, L’t          1st Vt H Art
  Conover W H, L’t        22d N Y Cav
  Clark J A, Cap          7th Mich Cav
  Cook W B, L’t           140th Pa Vol
  Califf B F, L’t         2d W S S S
  Cook E F, Major         2d N Y Cav
  Cooke H P, A A G
  Crocker H, L’t          1st N J Cav
  Camp T B C, Cap         52d Pa Vol
  Clark L S, Cap          62d N Y Vol
  Chapin H C, Cap         4th Vt Vol
  Conyngham J B, L’t Col  52d Pa Vol
  Christopher J, Cap      16th U S Inf
  Cochrane M A, Cap         “    “
  Causten M C, L’t        19th U S Inf
  Chubbuck D B, L’t       19th Mass Vol
  Carpenter S D, L’t      3d O Vol
  Carley A A, Cap         73d Ind Vol
  Connelly R J, L’t       73d Ill Vol
  Cartwright A G, Cap     85th N Y Vet Vol
  Clark M L, Cap          101st Pa Vol
  Compher A, Cap            “     “
  Clapp J B, Adj          16th Conn Vol
  Case A G, L’t             “      “
  Cratty E G, Cap         103d Pa Vol
  Coats H A, Cap          85th N Y Vet Vol
  Crooks S J, Col         22d N Y Cav
  Case S F, Cap           2d O Cav
  Cutler J, Cap           34th O Vol
  Coglin T, Cap           14th N Y H Art
  Cord T A, L’t           19th U S Inf
  Cloadt J, Cap           119th N Y Vol
  Calkins W W, L’t        104th Ill Vol
  Craig J, Cap            1st W Va Vol
  Colville J W, Cap       5th Mich Vol
  Crosby T J, Cap         157th Pa Vol
  Cohen M, Cap            4th Ky Vol
  Copeland J R, Cap       7th O Vol
  Creps F A M, L’t        77th Pa Vol
  Curtis R, L’t           4th Ky Vol
  Clements J, L’t         15th Ky Vol
  Caldwell D B, L’t       75th O Vol
  Cubbison J C, L’t       101st Pa Vol
  Crawford H P, Cap       2d Ill Cav
  Chase E E, Cap          1st R I Cav
  Coffin G A, Adj         29th Ind Vol
  Cockran T G, L’t        77th Pa Vol
  Conrad W F, Cap         25th Iowa Vol
  Carperts L M, Cap       18th Wis Vol
  Cox J L, L’t            21st Ill Vol
  Cunningham M, L’t       42d NY Vol
  Charters A M, L’t       17th Iowa Vol
  Carpenter J Q, L’t      150th Pa Vol
  Campbell B F, Cap
  Clark H L, L’t          2d Mass Art
  Copeland W A, L’t       10th Mich Vol
  Cuniffe H, L’t          13th Ill Vol
  Carpenter E N, Cap      6th Pa Cav
  Clemmons T, L’t         13th Ill Vol
  Crocker Geo A, A A G
  Cook W C, Adj           9th Mich Cav
  Cowles H F, L’t         18th Conn Vol
  Cramer C P, L’t         21st N Y Cav
  Clancey C W, L’t Col    52d O Vol
  Coram Geo, R Q M        2d Ky Cav
  Case M B, L’t           23d U S C T
  Cline D G, L’t          75th O V M I
  Conn C G, L’t           1st M S S
  Cook J L, L’t           6th Iowa Vol
  Cunningham M, L’t       1st Vt H Art
  Copland C D, L’t        58th Mass Vol
  Chamberlain V B, Cap    7th Conn Vol
  Catlin J E, L’t         45th Pa Vol
  Cashell C P, L’t        12th Pa Cav
  Clark M W, Cap          11th Iowa Cav
  Channel J R, L’t        1st Ill Art
  Day J W, L’t            17th Mass Vol
  Damrell W S, L’t        13th     “
  Dearing G A, L’t        16th Me Vol
  Duferr T J, L’t         5th Mich Cav
  Dickerson A A, L’t      16th Conn Vol
  Donaghy J, Cap          103d Pa Vol
  Davis W G, L’t          27th Mass Vol
  Day A P, L’t            15th Conn Vol
  Dewees J H, Major       13th Pa Cav
  Daniels E S, Cap        35th U S C T
  Dietz Henry, Cap        45th N Y Vol
  Dodge C C, Cap          20th Mich Vol
  Dieffenbach A C, L’t    73d Pa Vol
  Dewees T B, L’t         2d U S Cav
  Dooley A T, L’t         51st Ind Vol
  Downing O J, Cap        2d N Y Cav
  Denny W N, Cap          57th Ind Vol
  Delano J A, L’t         51st Ind Vol
  Davis Q R, L’t          123d O Vol
  Derrickson J G, Cap     66th N Y Vol
  Dean S V, L’t           145th Pa Vol
  Daily W A, Cap          8th Pa Cav
  Davis C G, L’t          1st Mass Cav
  Doruschke B, Cap        26th Wis Vol
  Dennis J B, Cap         7th Conn Vol
  Davis L R, Cap          7th O Vol
  Drake L, L’t            22d Mich Vol
  Dutton W G, L’t         67th Pa Vol
  Dillon C D, L’t         7th Iowa Cav
  Drennan J S, L’t        1st Vt H Art
  Deane T J, L’t          5th Mich Cav
  Dunn J, L’t             64th N Y Vol
  Dunning A J, L’t        7th N Y Art
  Davenport T F, Cap      75th O Vol
  Davis H C, Cap          18th Conn Vol
  Davis T C, L’t          38th Ill Vol
  Dirlan C L, Cap         72d O Vol
  Doughton O G, L’t       111th O Vol
  Day J R, Cap            3d Me Vol
  Donovan J, L’t          2d N J Vol
  Durbrow W, Cap          40th N Y Vol
  Dyre E B, L’t           1st Conn Cav
  Dinsmore A, Cap         5th Pa Cav
  Duzenburgh A, Cap       35th NY Vol
  Dorris W C, L’t         111th Ill Vol
  Dodge H G, L’t          2d Pa Cav
  Dixon A, Cap            104th N Y Vol
  Dunn M, Major           19th Mass Vol
  Doane E B, Cap          8th Iowa Cav
  Davidson J, L’t         6th N Y Art
  Drake J W, L’t          136th N Y Vol
  Downs C, L’t            33d N J Vol
  Davis J W, L’t          115th N Y Vol
  Duven J, L’t            5th N H Vol
  Dushane J M, Cap        142d Pa Vol
  Davis W H, Cap          4th Md Vol
  Dircks C S F, Cap       1st Tenn Vol
  Devine J S, L’t         71st Pa Vol
  Diemer M, L’t           10th Mo Vol
  Dingley F, L’t          7th R I Vol
  Durfee W H, L’t         5th    “
  Durboyne G, L’t         66th N Y Vol
  Donohey G B, Cap        7th Pa Res
  Dieffenbach W H, L’t     “  “   “
  De Lay R, L’t           3d Iowa Cav
  Demmick O W, L’t        11th N H Vol
  Drake C H, L’t          142d Pa Vol
  Dygest K S, Cap         16th Mich Vol
  Dick L, L’t             72d O Vol
  Davis L B, Cap          93d Ind Vol
  Dillon F W, Cap         1st Ky Cav
  Dahl O R, L’t           15th Wis Vol
  Dickey M V, L’t         94th O Vol
  Davis Byron, L’t        71st Pa Vol
  Day E, Cap              89th O Vol
  Dalton G A, L’t         22d Mich Vol
  Dickerson E, L’t        44th Wis Vol
  Durnam T J, L’t         16th U S Inf
  Dunn H C, L’t           10th Ky Vol
  Driscoll D, L’t         24th Mo Vol
  Davis E J, L’t          44th Ill Vol
  Dugan J, L’t            35th Ind Vol
  Dorr H G, A Q M         4th Mass Cav
  Drake J M, L’t          9th N J Vol
  Dicey E C, Cap          1st Mich S S
  Downing H A, L’t        31st U S C T
  Dibeler J B, Cap        45th Pa Vol
  Davidson J W, L’t       95th O Vol
  Denny W N, Major        51st Ind Vol
  Drew G H, L’t           9th N H Vol
  Everett Chas, L’t       70th O Vol
  Eastman F R, L’t        2d Pa Cav
  Elkin J L F, Adj        1st N J Vol
  Eastmond O, Cap         1st N C U Vol
  Evans T E, L’t          52d Pa Vol
  Egertone J W, L’t       13th Ind Vol
  Ellinwood W B, L’t      10th Wis Vol
  Edwards D C, L’t        2d Md Vol
  English D, Major        11th Ky Cav
  Elder S S, Cap          1st U S Art
  Eckings T K, L’t        3d N J Vol
  Evans B W, Cap          4th O Cav
  Errickson J H, L’t      57th N Y Vol
  Eberheart H H, Cap      120th O Vol
  Eagan M, Cap            15th W Va Vol
  Evans N C, Cap          184th Pa Vol
  Eglin A R, Cap          45th O Vol
  Ewen M, Cap             21st Wis Vol
  Eagan John, L’t         1st U S Art
  Elder John, L’t         8th Ind Vol
  Edwards T D, Asst Eng   U S Navy
  Edminston S, L’t        89th O Vol
  Evans H F
  Eans M, Cap             15th N Y Cav
  Elheny J L F, Adj       1st N J Vol
  Flick M, L’t            67th Pa Vol
  Fritz J, L’t            11th Tenn Vol
  Fay S A, L’t            85th N Y Vet Vol
  Frost C W, L’t            “   “      “
  Freeman D W D, Cap      101st Pa Vol
  Fiske J E, Cap          2d Mass Art
  Fish O M, L’t             “    “
  Fluke A L, L’t          103d Pa Vol
  Fahs J, Cap             87th Pa Vol
  Foot M C, L’t           92d N Y Vol
  Fontaine J, L’t         73d Pa Vol
  Fairbanks J, L’t        72d O Vol
  Follett W H, L’t        2d Mass Art
  Fry Alfred, L’t         73d Ind Vol
  Fish G W                3d O Cav
  Frasier J, Col          140th Pa Vol
  Fleming C K, Major      11th Vt Vol
  Foster J W, Cap         42d Ill Vol
  Fales J M, L’t          1st R I Cav
  Finney G E, Adj         19th Ind Vol
  Fowler J H, L’t         100th O Vol
  Fox G B, Major          75th O Vol
  Farr W V, Cap           106th Pa Vol
  Forbes W H, Major       2d Mass Cav
  Ford E W, Cap           9th Minn Vol
  Ferris J M, L’t         3d Mich Vol
  Fairchild H, L’t        10th Wis Vol
  Funk J W, Cap           39th N Y Vol
  Faye E M, L’t           42d N Y Vol
  Furgerson J, L’t        1st N J Vol
  Flannery D, L’t         4th N J Vol
  Fowler H M, L’t         15th N J Vol
  Fisk W M, Cap           73d N Y Vol
  Fleeger G W, L’t        11th Pa R C Vol
  Fagan C A, L’t          11th Pa R C Vol
  French H, L’t           3d Vt Vol
  Francis J L, Cap        135th O Vol
  Field A, L’t            94th N Y Vol
  Fritchy A W, L’t        26th Mo Vol
  Fortescue L R, L’t      Signal C U S A
  Fellows M, L’t          149th Pa Vol
  Fisher R, L’t           17th Mo Vol
  Fenner W, L’t           2d R I Vol
  Fox J D, L’t            16th Ill Cav
  Fritze C, L’t           24th Ill Vol
  Fisher L W, L’t         4th Vt Vol
  Fatzer S, L’t           108th N Y Vol
  Fontaine E, Lt          7th Pa R C Vol
  Flamsburgh D, Cap       4th Ind Bat
  Forney D, Lt            30th O Vol
  Fisher S, Lt            93d Ind Vol
  Fielder J, Cap          Eng C U S A
  Finney D S, Lt          14&15 Ill Vet Bat
  Fairfield O B, Lt       89th O Vol
  Fitzpatrick L, Lt       146th N Y Vol
  Fales L D C, Lt
  Freeman H B, Lt         18th U S Inf
  Foster H C, Lt          23d Ind Vol
  Foley John, Lt          59th Mass Vol
  Faass Louis, Lt         14th N Y Art
  Frost R J, Lt           9th Mich Cav
  Fall J P, Cap           32d Me Vol
  Filler J H, Major       55th Pa Vol
  Fay W W, Cap            56th Mass Vol
  George G J, Lt          40th Ill Vol
  Gillespie J B, Cap      120th Ill Vol
  Gunn T M, Lt            21st Ky Vol
  Gilbert E C, Cap        152d N Y Vol
  Gill A W H, Cap         14th N Y Vol
  Greble C E, Cap         8th Mich Cav
  Green J H, Lt           100th O Vol
  Gotshall J, Adj         55th Pa Vol
  Godwin J M, Lt          12th Ind Vol
  Grover J E, Lt          6th Ind Cav
  Gayer H, Lt             133d W Va Mil
  Gatch O C, Cap          89th O Vol
  Gross J M, Cap          18th Ky Vol
  Galbraith H E, Cap      22d Mich Vol
  Goetz J, Cap             “      “
  Gray W L, Cap           151st Pa Vol
  Gross C M, Lt           110th O Vol
  Grant G W, Lt           88th Pa Vol
  Grant H D, Lt           117th N Y Vol
  Gray R H, Lt            15th U S Inf
  Gariss A J, Adj         1st Md Cav
  Gates A L, Lt           10th Wis Vol
  Goodwin J A, Lt         1st Mass Cav
  Gamble G H, Adj         8th Ill Cav
  Gates R C, Lt           18th U S Inf
  Gilmore J A, Lt         79th N Y Vol
  Gamble H, Lt            73d Ind Vol
  Grant E, Cap            1st Vt Cav
  Granger C M, Lt         88th N Y Vol
  Goodrich J O, Adj       85th N Y Vet Vol
  Glazeer W W, Lt         2d N Y Cav
  Goodin A, Lt            82d O Vol
  Gordon C O, Lt          1st Me Cav
  Green E H, Cap          107th Pa Vol
  Gimber H W, Cap         150th Pa Vol
  Gilman ——, Lt           3d Me Vol
  Gottland C, Lt          134th N Y Vol
  Getman D, Cap           10th N Y Cav
  Griffin H G, Lt         112th Ill Vol
  Gordon E, Lt            81st Ind Vol
  Geasland S A, Lt        11th Tenn Cav
  Grey F C, Lt            11th Pa Vol
  Green C W, Lt           44th Ind Vol
  Goss J W, Lt            1st Mass Art
  Grafton B, Cap          64th O Vol
  Gates J, Cap            33d O Vol
  Grant A, Cap            19th Wis Vol
  Green G W, Cap          19th Ind Vol
  Goodrich A L, Cap       8th N Y Cav
  Gamble N P, Lt          63d Pa Vol
  Garbet D, Lt            77th Pa Vol
  Good T G, Lt            1st Md Cav
  Gordon H M, Lt          143d Pa Vol
  Gray P, Lt              77th Pa Vol
  Gallagher J, Lt         4th O Vt Vol
  Galloway J L, C’p A A G
  Green E A, Lt           81st Ill Vol
  Green J L, A A G        U S A
  Gove W A, Lt            3d Mass Cav
  Grant S, Lt             6th Mich Art
  Griffin T, Adj          55th U S C T
  Gore J B, Lt            115th Ill Vol
  Gross T, Lt             21st Ill Vol
  Gordon G C, Cap         24th Mich Vol
  Gerhardt H, Lt          24th Ill Vol
  Gageby J H, Lt          19th U S Inf
  Gutjahr C, Cap          16th Ill Vol
  Galloway ——, Lt         15th U S Inf
  Grayham P, Cap          54th Pa Vol
  Godley M L, Lt          17th Iowa Vol
  Gould D, Cap            33d W Va Vol
  Grey W H, Lt            14th Ill Cav
  Gude A, Cap             51st Ind Vol
  Glenn S A, Cap          89th O Vol
  Grey Philip, Lt         72d Pa Vol
  Huey Pennock, Col       8th Pa Cav
  Hetsler J W, Cap        9th O Cav
  Hicks D W, Lt
  Halsey T J, Major       11th N J Vol
  Hutchinson J, Lt        2d W Va Mt Inf
  Huffman J W, Lt         5th Iowa Vol
  Hinds H H, Lt           57th Pa Vol
  Hagler J S, Cap         5th Tenn Vol
  Helms M B, Lt           1st W Va Vol
  Hall C B, Cap              “    “
  Hallenburg G, Lt        1st O Vol
  Hall A M, Lt            9th Minn Vol
  Haveley T, Cap          79th Ill Vol
  Hubbard H R, Lt         119th Ill Vol
  Heffley A, Cap          142d Pa Vol
  Hays A H, Cap           7th Tenn Cav
  Hare T H, Lt            5th O Cav
  Helm J B, Lt            101st Pa Vol
  Heffley C P, Lt         142d Pa Vol
  Hubbell F A, Lt         67th Pa Cav
  Heffner W, Lt             “    “
  Harrington B F, Lt      18th Pa Cav
  Hart E R, Lt            1st Vt Art
  Hanson J B, Lt          1st Mass Art
  Hodge W E, Lt           5th Md Vol
  Hawkins S W, Lt         7th Tenn Cav
  Henry C D, Lt           4th O Cav
  Hays W W, Lt            34th O Vol
  Hodge J F, Lt           55th Pa Vol
  Hall R F, Lt            75th O Vol
  Haight J T, Lt          8th Iowa Cav
  Hastings T J, Lt        15th Mass Vol
  Hock A, Cap             63d N Y Vol
  Hill G W, Lt            7th Mich Cav
  Heslit J, Lt            3d Pa Cav
  Hazel E J, Lt           6th Pa Cav
  Hanon J, Lt             115th Ill Vol
  Herrick L C, Lt         1st N Y Cav
  Hine J J, Lt            100th O Vol
  Herbert R, Lt           50th Pa Vol
  Harris S, Lt            5th Mich Cav
  Heppard T H, Lt         101st Pa Vol
  Hamilton W, Lt          2d Mass Art
  Hastings G L, Lt        24th N Y Bat
  Horton S H, Lt          101st Pa Vol
  Huff H B, Cap           184th Pa Vol
  Hampton C G, Lt         15th N Y Cav
  Hard W B, Lt            17th Mich Cav
  Heil J, Cap             45th N Y Cav
  Hauf N, Lt                “   “   “
  Hitt W R, Cap           113th Ill Cav
  Harris W, Cap           24th Mo Cav
  Hobbie C A, Cap         17th Conn Cav
  Holden E, Lt            1st Vet Cav
  Hedges S P, Adj         112th N Y Vol
  Hinds H C, Lt           102d N Y Vol
  Hall W P, Major         6th N Y Cav
  Hart R K, Cap           19th U S Inf
  Hodge A, Cap            80th Ill Vol
  Harvey W H, Lt          51st Ind Vol
  Hay D, Cap              80th Ill Vol
  Harmer R J, Lt            “     “
  Hart C M, Lt            45th Pa Vol
  Hopper J, Lt            2d N Y Cav
  Hand G T, Lt            51st Pa Vol
  Hartzog R H O, Cap      1st N Y Cav
  Hagler J S, Cap         5th Tenn Vol
  Hintz H, Cap            16th Conn Vol
  Hunt C O, Lt            5th Me Bat
  Halpin G, Lt            116th Pa Vol
  Hagenback J C, Lt       67th Pa Vol
  Hagan P A, Lt           7th Md Vol
  Holland W R, Lt         5th Md Cav
  Hawkins H E, Cap        78th Ill Vol
  Heer T A, Cap           28th O Vol
  Hart G D, Lt            5th Pa Cav
  Hull G W, Lt            135th O Vol
  Hoyt H B, Cap           40th N Y Vol
  Hamilton H E, Lt           “    “
  Hezelton D W, Lt        22d N Y Cav
  Hovey H, Lt             78th Ill Vol
  Hame D J, Cap           19th Mass Vol
  Holahan C P, Lt         19th Pa Cav
  Hamilton H N, Lt        59th N Y Vol
  Hoppin H P, Lt          2d Mass Art
  Huntington E S, Lt      11th U S Inf
  Hutchison R C, Cap      8th Mich Vol
  Hoyt W H, Lt            16th Iowa Vol
  Hart P H, Lt            19th Ind Vol
  Hughes R M, Lt          14th Ill Cav
  Henckly L D, Lt         10th Wis Vol
  Harkness R, Major          “    “
  Hewitt J, Lt            105th Pa Vol
  Hastings C W, Cap       12th Mass Vol
  Heston J, Lt            4th N J Vol
  Hayes E, Cap            95th N Y Vol
  Heffelfinger J, Lt      7th P R V Corps
  Harvey J L, Lt          2d Pa Art
  Hobart M C, Cap         7th Wis Vol
  Hock R B, Cap           12th N Y Cav
  Holman W C, Lt          9th Vt Vol
  Hadley H V, Lt          7th Ind Vol
  Hall C, Lt              13th Wis Cav
  Hayden J A, Cap         11th P R V Corps
  Hill J B, Lt            17th Mass Vol
  Hallett M V B, Lt        2d Pa Cav
  Hodge W L, Cap          120th Ill Vol
  Henry A J, Lt             “      “
  Hamlin S G, Cap         134th N Y Vol
  Holladay V G, Lt        2d Ind Cav
  Havens D, Lt            85th Ill Vol
  Hays C A, Lt            111th Pa Vol
  Hastings J L, Adj       7th Pa R V Corps
  Haines H A, Cap         184th Pa Vol
  Hunter A W, Lt          2d U S (C’d) Art
  Harris J W, Lt          2d Ind Cav
  Heltemus J B, Cap       18th Ky Vol
  Herzberg F, Lt          66th N Y Vol
  Henry J M, Lt           154th N Y Vol
  Harris G, Lt            79th Ind Vol
  Holt W C, Cap           6th Tenn Vol
  Harrison C E, Lt        89th O Vol
  Huey R, Lt              2d E Tenn Vol
  Henderson J H, Lt       14 & 15 Ill Vet Bat
  Higley E H, Lt          1st Vet Cav
  Hendryks W H, Lt        11th Mich Bat’n
  Hull G W, Lt            135th O Vol
  Hamilton W B, Lt        22d Mich Vol
  Hendrick F, Cap         1st N Y Cav
  Huston J, Lt            95th O Vol
  Henderson R, Lt         1st Mass Art
  Howe C H, Lt            21st Ill Vol
  Haldeman J, Lt          129th Ill Vol
  Hymer S, Cap            115th Ill Vol
  Hieurod P, Cap          105th O Vol
  Hackett A N, Lt         110th O Vol
  Huntley C C, Lt         16th Ill Cav
  Hand S P, Lt            43d U S C T
  Hurst T B, Lt           7th Pa Res V C
  Hale G W, Lt            101st O Vol
  Hopf Geo, Lt            2d Md Vol
  Hescock H, Cap          1st Mo Art
  Hill O M, Lt            23d U S C T
  Hall C T, Lt            13th Mich Vol
  Heck F W, Cap           2d Md Vol
  Hill V H, A Q M
  Hogeland D B, Cap       76th Pa Vol
  Hood John, Lt           80th Ill Vol
  Hogue J B, Lt           4th Pa Cav
  Holmes A J, Cap         37th Wis Vol
  Haywood L E, Lt         58th Mass Vol
  Irwin C L, Lt           78th Ill Vol
  Irwin S E, Lt           3d Iowa Vol
  Irwin W H, Adj          103d Pa Vol
  Imbric J M, Cap         3d O Vol
  Isett J H, Major        8th Ind Cav
  Irsch F, Cap            45th N Y Vol
  Isham A B, Lt           7th Mich Cav
  Ingleden L, Cap
  Jackson R W, Lt         21st Wis Vol
  Jenkins J H, Adj          “     “
  Johnson H A, Lt         3d Me Vol
  James H H, Lt           6th Ind Vol
  Jones S F, Cap          80th Ill Vol
  Johnson G, Lt           16th Conn Vol
  Judd J H, Lt            27th Mass Vol
  Jacobs J W, Cap         4th Ky Vol
  John E P, L’t           135th O Vol
  Johnson J C, Cap        149th Pa Vol
  Jobe B A, Cap           11th Pa R V C
  Johnson V W, L’t        10th N Y Cav
  Jones J A, L’t          21st Ill Vol
  Johnson C K, L’t        1st Me Cav
  Jennings J T, Cap       75th O Vol
  Jones D, Cap            14th N Y Art
  Judson S C, Cap         106th N Y Vol
  Jenkins H, Cap          40th Mass Vol
  Jackson C G, Cap        84th Pa Vol
  Jones J P, L’t          55th O Vol
  Jenkins G W, L’t        9th W Va Vol
  Jones C W, L’t          16th Pa Cav
  Justus J C, L’t         2d Pa R V C
  Jackson J, L’t          4th Ind Cav
  Jackson J S, L’t        22d Ill Vol
  Jones S E, L’t          7th N Y Art
  Jones H, L’t            5th U S Cav
  Jones W, L’t            38th O Vol
  Jones M J, Cap          115th Ill Vol
  Johnson R, Cap          6th N Y Cav
  Johnson J W, L’t        1st Mass Art
  Johnson W N, Correspt
  Jones Alfred, R Q M     50th Pa Vet Vol
  Johnson J D, Cap        10th N J Vol
  Jordan E C, L’t         7th Conn Vol
  Jacks J, L’t            15th W Va Vol
  Kelley D O, L’t         100th O Vol
  Krohn P, L’t            5th N Y Cav
  Keeler A M, Cap         22d Mich Vol
  Kendal T, L’t           15th U S Inf
  Keniston J, L’t         100th Ill Vol
  Keith C E, L’t          19th Ill Vol
  Knowles E M, L’t        42d Ind Vol
  Kreuger W, L’t          2d Mo Vol
  Kreps F A M, L’t        77th Pa Vol
  Kane S, L’t             38th Ind Vol
  Kelly D A, Cap          1st Ky Vol
  Kendrick E, Adjt        10th N J Vol
  Kerr S C, L’t           126th O Vol
  Kendall H T, Adjt       50th Pa Vol
  Kelly A, L’t            126th O Vol
  Keen J, L’t             7th Pa V R C
  Kuchin A, L’t           5th Md Vol
  Kees G W, L’t           18th Conn Vol
  Kreiger A, L’t          67th Pa Vol
  Knowles R A, L’t        116th O Vol
  Knapp F H, L’t          9th O Cav
  Kennaly J D, L’t        8th O Cav
  Kempton J F, L’t        75th O Vol
  Kline D J, L’t          75th O Vol
  Kennedy J W, Lt         134th N Y Vol
  Kankel E, L’t           45th N Y Vol
  Kandler H, L’t            “   “   “
  Kidd J H, L’t           1st Md Art
  Kendrick R H, Lt        25th Wis Vol
  Kenyon G C, Lt          17th Ill Vol
  Kidder G C, Lt          113th Pa Vol
  Kelly H K, Cap          118th Pa Vol
  Knox G, Lt              109th Pa Vol
  Kelly J M, Lt           4th Tenn Vol
  Kessler J G, Cap        2d Ind Cav
  Kirby W M, Lt           3d N Y Art
  King T, R Q M           101st Pa Vol
  Keister W H H, Lt       103d Pa Vol
  Kirk J B, Lt            101st Pa Vol
  Krause J, Cap           3d Pa Art
  Kempton F H, Lt         58th Mass Art
  Kennits H, Lt           2d Mass Vol
  Kauts J D, Lt           1st Ky Cav
  Kellogg H, Lt           6th Mich Cav
  Kronemeyer C, Cap       52 N Y Vol
  King M D, Lt            3d O Vol
  Kendal J, Cap           43d Ind Vol
  King G E, Cap           103d Ill Vol
  Knight H B, Lt          20th Mich Vol
  Kelly J B, Lt           1st Pa Cav
  Kirkpatrick G W, Lt     15th Iowa Vol
  Knox J C, Lt            4th Ind Cav
  Kepheart J S, Lt        5th Ind Vol
  Kerin J, Lt             6th U S Cav
  Kenyon P D, Cap         14 & 15th Ill V B
  King Abe, Lt            12th O V Inf
  King John, Lt           15th Ill Cav
  Kissam Edgar, Cap       9th N J Vol
  Kepheart J, Lt          13th O Vol
  Kelton J, Lt            2d Pa Art
  Kibby G L, Lt           4th R I Vol
  Kendale W M, Major      73d Ind Vol
  Kost R, Lt              6th Conn Vol
  Kenfield F, Cap         17th Vt Vol
  King John, Lt           6th Conn Vol
  Kings S B, Cap          12th Pa Cav
  Lindemeyer L, Cap       45th N Y Vol
  Lemson A T, Lt          104th N Y Vol
  Litchfield J B, Cap     4th Me Vol
  Lombard H G, Adj        4th Mich Vol
  Logan W S, Cap          17th Mich Vol
  Love J E, Cap           8th Kan Vol
  Lucas John, Cap         5th Ky Vol
  Lovett L T, Cap           “  “  “
  Lodge G R, Lt           53d Ill Vol
  Lucas W D, Cap          5th N Y Cav
  Little J S, Cap         143 Pa Vol
  Lewis C E, Lt           1st N Y Drag
  Laycock J B, Lt         7th Pa R V C
  Lyman H H, Lt           147th N Y Vol
  Larrabee W H, Lt        7th Me Vol
  Lanning A, Serg         24th Mich Vol
  Leigh S J, A D C
  Lee A, Lt               152d N Y Vol
  Lynch C M, Major        145th Pa Vol
  Lynn J L, Lt              “      “
  Lyttle C W, Cap           “      “
  Loud E J C, Lt          2d Pa Art
  Lewry D W, Lt           2d Pa Art
  Longnecker J H, Adjt    101st Pa Vol
  Landen H, Lt            16th Conn Vol
  Laughlin J M,           103d Pa Vol
  Langworthy D A, Cap     85th N Y Vol
  Lafler J A, Lt           “      “
  Lyman J, Lt             27th Mass Vol
  Laird J O, Lt           35th U S Inf
  Litchfiel A C, Lt Col   7th Mich Cav
  Lym W C, Lt             23d O Vol
  Lintz W J, Lt           8th Tenn Vol
  Leslee J L, Lt          18th Pa Cav
  Leonard A, Lt           71st N Y Vol
  Laird M, Lt             16th Iowa Vol
  Luther J C, Lt          1st Pa V R C
  Lemon M W, Lt           14th N Y Art
  Lane L M, Lt            9th Minn Vol
  Lamson T D, Lt          3d Ind Cav
  Loomis A W, Lt          18th Conn Vol
  Locke W H, Lt             “     “
  Lindsy A H, Lt            “     “
  Leith S, Lt             132d N Y Vol
  Long C H, Lt            1st Md Vol
  Lewis D B, Lt           12th Pa Cav
  Livingston C H, Lt      1st W Va Cav
  Law G, Cap              6th W V Cav
  Loyd J K, Cap           17th Mass Vol
  Leeds M A, Lt Col       153d O Vol
  Lock D R, Lt            8th Ky Cav
  Limbard A, Lt           M’Laughlin’s Sq
  Lloyd T S C, Lt         6th Ind Cav
  Lawrence G H, Lt        2d N Y Md Rifles
  Laud J R, Cap           66th Ind Vol
  Lee E N, Cap            5th Mich Cav
  Larkin F A, Lt          18th Ind Vol
  Locklin A W, Lt         94th N Y Vol
  Lang C H, Lt            59th Mass Vol
  Latimer E C, Cap        27th U S C T
  Lenter A P, Cap         2d Tenn Inf
  Myers T, L’t            107th Pa Vol
  Mooney J, L’t             “    “  “
  Mussel O, Cap           68th N Y Vol
  Millis V, L’t            “    “   “
  Mosely H H, L’t         25th O Vol
  Makepeace A J, Cap      19th Ind Vol
  McDade A, L’t           154th N Y Vol
  Murphy F, Cap           97th N Y Vol
  Moran F, L’t            73d N Y Vol
  Mendenhall J A, L’t     75th N Y Vol
  Mell J R, L’t           61st N Y Vol
  Morres W J, L’t         5th Md Vol
  Metta J S, L’t           “   “  “
  Merwin S T C, L’t       18th Conn Vol
  Madera W B, L’t         6th W Va Vol
  Meany D B, Cap          13th Pa Cav
  Matherson L J, L’t      18th Conn Vol
  McKeag F, L’t             “    “   “
  Morningstar H, L’t      87th Pa Vol
  Manning J S, L’t        116th O Vol
  Mash P, Cap             67th Pa Vol
  McNeal D, L’t           13th Pa Cav
  Matson C C, L’t Col     6th Ind Cav
  McCarty W W, Cap        18th O Cav
  Morgan C H, L’t         21st Wis Cav
  McGruder W H, L’t         “   “   “
  McDowal J S, Cap        77th Pa Cav
  Moses H, L’t            4th Ky Cav
  Morrison M V B, Lt      33d O Cav
  McKinison A H, Lt       10th Wis Cav
  Mead L C, Lt            22d Mich Cav
  McKercher D, Col        10th Wis Cav
  Mathews A S, Adjt       22d Mich Vol
  McGowan E, Lt           29th Ind Vol
  Murphy J, Lt            16th U S Inf
  Mitchell J, Lt          79th Ill Vol
  McCune A W, Lt          2d O Vet Vol
  Muhlemon J R, Maj. &c
  McNeil S, Lt            51st O Vol
  Metcalf C W, Cap        42d Ind Vol
  Messick J M, Lt          “   “   “
  Mackey J T, Lt          16th U S Inf
  Mahoney J S, Lt         21st O Vol
  Mead W H, Lt            6th Ky Cav
  Moore M, Cap            29th Ind Vol
  Moore G W, Cap          7th Tenn Vol
  McConalee W J, Lt       14th Iowa Cav
  Morton J W, Cap         4th Mass Cav
  Malambre J M, Lt        75th O Vol
  Morse E, Lt             78th Ill Vol
  Marshall W S, Major     5th Iowa Vol
  McGovern J, L’t         75th Pa Vol
  McKinley J, L’t         98th O Vol
  McNiece A, L’t          73d Pa Vol
  Mann G, L’t             80th O Vol
  Moore F, L’t            73d Pa Vol
  Mooney A H, Cap         16th N Y Cav
  McHugh J, Cap           69th Pa Vol
  McFadden W M, Cap       59th N Y Vol
  Monaghan J, L’t         62d Pa Vol
  McIntosh J C, L’t       145th Pa Vol
  Mather F W, L’t         7th N Y Art
  McCray H, Cap           115th Pa Vol
  Mockrie P B, L’t        7th N Y Art
  May J, Cap              15th Mass Vol
  Moore N H, Cap          7th N Y Art
  McCutcheon E F, L’t     64th N Y Vol
  McWain E J, L’t         1st N Y V Art
  McCreary D B, L’t Col   145th Pa Vol
  Murry S F, Cap          2d U S S S
  McKage J, Cap           184th Pa Vol
  Muffley S F, Adjt         “   “   “
  Mangus H F, L’t         53d Pa Vol
  McLauglin J, L’t         “  “   “
  McGinnes W A, L’t       19th Mass Vol
  Mathews A R, L’t        1st Vt Art
  Morse A, L’t             “  “   “
  Maish L, Cap            87th PA V l
  McQuiddy ——, Cap        5th Tenn Cav
  Marshall W S, Adjt      51st Ind Vol
  McDill H, L’t           80th Ill Vol
  Maxwell C A, L’t        3d O Vol
  Mall D H, Cap           73d Ind Vol
  Munday J W, L’t          “   “   “
  Murdock H S, L’t         “   “   “
  McHolland D A, Cap       “   “   “
  Morey H, L’t            10th N Y Cav
  McColgin J, L’t         7th O Cav
  Morris J H, L’t         4th Ky Vol
  McLernan P, Major       22d N Y Cav
  Mattock C P, Major      17th Me Vol
  Myers W H, L’t          76th N Y Vol
  McGeehan J, L’t         147th N Y Vol
  Miller F C, Col         147th N Y Vol
  Mitchell H W, L’t       14th N Y Vol
  Maltison A C, Cap       12th N J Vol
  Morrisy G H, A Q M      12th Iowa
  McKay D S, L’t          18th Pa Cav
  Mayer L, L’t            12th “   “
  Merritt H A D, L’t      5th N Y Cav
  Metzger J, Cap          55th Pa Vol
  Moore Le Roy, Cap       72d O Vol
  McCain J C, L’t         9th Minn Vol
  McKee T H, Cap          1st W Va Vol
  McGuire T, Cap          7th Ill Vol
  Miller J W, L’t         14th Ill Cav
  Murphy J, L’t           69th N Y Vol
  Mallison J, L’t         94th N Y Vol
  Moulton O, L’t Col      25th Mass Vol
  Morgan S M, Cap
  McGraylis M, Cap        93d Ind Vol
  Morgan Ben B, L’t Col   75th O Vol
  Mulligan J A, L’t       4th Mass Cav
  Mead S, Cap             111th N Y Vol
  McCall O, L’t           103d Pa Vol
  Mullin D W, Cap         101st Pa Vol
  Morrow J M, L’t          “    “   “
  McHenry C, L’t          85th N Y Vet Vol
  Miller W G, L’t         16th Conn Vol
  Mackey J F, Cap         103d Pa Vol
  Morrow J J, Cap          “   “   “
  Mathews W F, L’t        1st Md Vol
  Merrill H P, Cap        4th Ky Vol
  Menier N J, L’t         93d Ind Vol
  McDonald H J, Cap       11th Conn Vol
  Moodey J E, L’t         59th Mass Vol
  Martin J C, Cap         1st Tenn Cav
  Melkorn M, Cap          135th O Vol
  Moon R A, L’t           6th Mich Cav
  Moore M M, L’t           “   “    “
  Manley J A, Cap         64th N Y Vol
  Miller H, L’t           17th Mich Vol
  McMannus P W, Adjt      27th Mass Vol
  Moses C C, Cap          58th Pa Vol
  Mudgett A G, Cap        11th Me Vol
  McMahon E, L’t          72d O Vol
  McKinstry J, L’t        16th Ill Cav
  McEvoy W, Adjt          3d Ill Vol
  McBeth N, L’t           45th O Vol
  Merry W A, L’t          106th N Y Vol
  Marney A, Cap           2d Tenn Vol
  Moore D T, L’t           “   “   “
  Morton G C, L’t         4th Pa Cav
  McKay R G, L’t          5th Mich Cav
  Molton H, L’t           1st U S Cav
  Montgomery R H, L’t     5th  “   “
  Marrow H C, Ass Egr     U S N
  Morgan J T, Cap         17th Mich Vol
  Manning G A, Cap        2d Mass Cav
  Mather E, L’t           1st Vt Cav
  McDonald C, L’t         2d Ill Art
  Moore W Q, L’t          2d Md Cav
  McCafferty N J, L’t     4th U S Art
  Millis J, L’t           66th Ind Vol
  McClure T W, L’t        6th U S Art
  McNitt R J, Cap         1st Pa Cav
  Mason J, L’t            13th Pa Cav
  Main C A, Cap           5th Ill Cav
  McDonald J, L’t         2d E Tenn Vol
  Morse C W, L’t          16th Conn Vol
  Miller C, Adjt          14th Ill Cav
  McAdams J, L’t          10th W Va Vol
  Mayer G W, L’t          37th Ind Vol
  Mure C, L’t             15th Mo Vol
  McIntyre ——, Cap        15th Wis Vol
  McCormick J, L’t        21st N Y Cav
  Moore L, Cap            72d O Vol
  McKay R G, L’t          1st Mich Cav
  Marshland A J, L’t      2d Pa Art
  Millard R J, Cap        “  “   “
  Mix W H, L’t            19th U S Cav
  Munger T J, L’t         37th Wis Vol
  McNure A, L’t           73d Pa Vol
  Mitchell H G, L’t       32d Me Vol
  Marshall J D, L’t       57th O Vol
  McLane ——, L’t          9th Minn Vol
  Morris W M, L’t         93d Ill Vol
  Norris A W, L’t         107th Pa Vol
  Norcross J C, L’t       2d Mass Cav
  Niedenhoffen C, L’t     9th Minn Vol
  Nyce W, L’t             2d N Y Cav
  Nelson W H, L’t         13th U S Inf
  Nutting J H, Cap        27th Mass Vol
  Norris O P, L’t         111th O Vol
  Nelson P, Major         66th N Y Vol
  Nelson A, L’t            “    “   “
  Nolan L, Cap            2d Del Vol
  Needham J B, L’t        4th Vt Vol
  Noggle C L, L’t         2d U S Inf
  Nichols C H, Cap        6th Conn Vol
  Newbrant J F, L’t       4th Mo Cav
  Norwood J, L’t          76th N Y Vol
  Norton E E, Cap         24th Mich Vol
  Nealy O H, L’t          11th U S Inf
  Netlerville W McM, L’t  12th U S Inf
  Nash W H, Cap           1st U S S S
  Neher W, L’t            7th Pa R V Cav
  Newsome E, Cap          81st Ill Vol
  Neal A, L’t             5th Ind Cav
  Nuhfer A, Cap           72d O Vol
  Nolan H J, Cap          14th N Y Cav
  Niswander D M, L’t      2d Pa Art
  Niemayer B H, L’t       11th Ky Cav
  Newlin C, Cap           7th Pa Cav
  Nyman H J, L’t          19th Mich Vol
  Nulland W R, L’t        5th Ind Cav
  Norris J, Cap           2d Pa Art
  Noyes C S, Cap          31st Me Vol
  Outcolt R V, L’t        135th O Vol
  O’Harre J, L’t          7th N Y Art
  Osborne F, L’t          19th Mass Vol
  Ong O C, L’t            2d Va Cav
  Ottinger W, Cap         8th Tenn Vol
  Oliphant D, L’t         35th N J Vol
  O’Connor W, L’t         13th Pa Cav
  O’Brien E, Cap          29th Mo Vol
  O’Shea E, L’t           13th Pa Cav
  Olcott D W, Cap         134th N Y Vol
  O’Kain J, L’t           7th Ill Cav
  Oats J G, L’t           3d O Vol
  O’Connel P, L’t         55th Pa Vol
  Owens W N, Major        1st Ky Cav
  Ogden J, L’t            1st Wis Cav
  Ogan H W, Cap           14th O Vol
  O’Sullivan F J, L’t     67th O Vol
  Olden G C, L’t          112th Ill Vol
  Pickenpaugh A C, L’t    6th W Va Vol
  Picquet H, L’t          32d Ill Vol
  Parker J T, L’t         13th Iowa Vol
  Phinney A, L’t          90th Ill Vol
  Provine W M, L’t        84th Ill Vol
  Purcell T, L’t          16th Iowa Vol
  Powell W H, L’t         2d Ill L Art
  Parker G M, L’t         45th Ill Vol
  Purveance J S, L’t      130th Ind Vol
  Pratt J E, L’t          4th Vt Vol
  Pemberton H V, Cap      14th N Y Art
  Piffard D H, L’t         “    “   “
  Price C A, L’t          5th Mich Vol
  Parker E B, L’t         1st Vt Art
  Pumphry J B, L’t        123d O Vol
  Paxton W N, L’t         140th Pa Vol
  Porter E, Cap           154th N Y Vol
  Poole S V, Cap            “    “   “
  Potts G P, L’t          151st Pa Vol
  Potts J H, L’t          75th O Vol
  Powers J L, L’t         157th N Y Vol
  Pettijohn, L’t          2d U S S S
  Parsons W L, Major      2d Wis Vol
  Parker J, Cap           1st N J Vol
  Powell J P, Cap         146th N Y Vol
  Paine L B, Cap          121st N Y Vol
  Partridge W H, L’t      67th N Y Vol
  Pierce H H, L’t         7th Conn Vol
  Pasco H S, Major        16th Conn Vol
  Pitt G W, L’t           85th N Y Vet
  Peake L S, L’t           “    “   “
  Pierson E C, L’t         “    “   “
  Piggott J T, Jr, Cap    8th Pa Cav
  Phelps L D, L’t         8th Pa Cav
  Plase W B, Cap          87th U S Inf
  Pentzell D, L’t         4th N Y Cav
  Peetrey J G, L’t        95th O Vol
  Powers D H, Cap         6th Mich Cav
  Parmalee J A, Cap       7th Ind Vol
  Penfield J A, Major     5th N Y Cav
  Potter E D, L’t         6th Mich Cav
  Purlier H, L’t          2d O Vol
  Powell O, L’t           42d Ill Vol
  Patterson J B, L’t      21st O Vol
  Perley J P, L’t         13th Mich Vol
  Pierce G S, Cap         19th U S Inf
  Perry F W, Cap          10th Wis Vol
  Pulliam M D, L’t        11th Ky Cav
  Prather Z R, L’t        116th Ill Vol
  Pierson M P, L’t        100th N Y Vol
  Pilsbury S H, Cap       5th Me Vol
  Phares W, L’t           46th W Va Vol
  Paul A C, A A G
  Pettit G, Cap           120th N Y Vol
  Preston A L, L’t        8th Mich Cav
  Pendleton D B, Cap      5th Mich Cav
  Porter D M, Cap         120th Ill Vol
  Pennybacker E J,        Cap 18th Pa Cav
  Patterson F A, Cap      3d W Va Cav
  Potter H C, L’t         18th Pa Cav
  Paul J S, L’t           122d O Vol
  Phillipp F, L’t         5th Pa Cav
  Pierce S C, Cap         3d N Y Cav
  Protsman C N, L’t       7th Wis Vol
  Potter G A, L’t         2d Ky Vol
  Peters G, L’t           9th N J Vol
  Pitt J H, L’t           118th N Y Vol
  Post James, L’t         149th Pa Vol
  Page J E, Cap           5th Iowa Vol
  Pace N C, Cap           80th Ill Vol
  Piper S B, Adjt         3d O Vol
  Phelps J D, Cap         73d Ind Vol
  Palmer E L, L’t         57th N Y Vol
  Poston J L, Cap         13th Tenn Vol
  Patree L B, L’t         126th O Vol
  Poole J F, L’t          1st W Va Cav
  Peterson C J A, L’t     1st R I Cav
  Peck M D, L’t           2d N Y Cav
  Pelton E W, L’t         2d Md Vol
  Patterson G W, L’t      135th O Vol
  Price J C, L’t          75th O Vol
  Pain H C, L’t           20th Ill Vol
  Porter B B, Cap         10th N Y Art
  Perrin Z, L’t           72d O Vol
  Platt L H, L’t          34th Mass Vol
  Porter L G, L’t         87th Ill
  Paine J A, Cap          2d Ind Cav
  Phelps L A, Major       5th W Va Vol
  Palmer J H, L’t         12th O Vol
  Peckeville W F, Cap     5th Iowa Vol
  Pope W A, L’t           18th Wis Vol
  Pyne D B, L’t           3d Mo Vol
  Ping T, Cap             17th Iowa Vol
  Park A, L’t              “    “    “
  Perrin J, Adjt          6th U S Cav
  Pierce W, L’t           17th Vt Vol
  Phillips W B, L’t       2d Pa Art
  Poindexter C O, L’t     31st Me Vol
  Pierson A P, L’t        9th Mich Cav
  Phillips W E, L’t       7th Conn Vol
  Payne L S, Cap          100th N Y Vol
  Price Chas A, L’t       3d Mich Vol
  Quigg D, Major          14th Ill Cav
  Rees M, L’t             72d O Vol
  Robinson J L, L’t       7th Tenn Cav
  Robbins H, Cap          2d Wis Vol
  Rockwell W O, L’t       134th N Y Vol
  Robbins N A, L’t        4th Me Vol
  Russell J H, L’t        12th Mass Vol
  Rockwell J O, L’t       97th N Y Vol
  Richardson H, L’t       19th Ind Vol
  Robinson G L, L’t       80th O Vol
  Robertson G W, L’t      22d Mich Vol
  Roach S, L’t            100th Ill Vol
  Riggs B T, Cap          18th Ky Vol
  Rice J A, Cap           73d Ill Vol
  Retilley W L, L’t       51st O Vol
  Ray T J, L’t            49th O Vol
  Reynolds H, L’t         42d Ill Vol
  Rose W B, L’t           106th Pa Cav
  Rourke J, Cap           1st Ill Art
  Reynolds W H, Major     14th N Y Art
  Ruger J M, L’t          57th Pa Vol
  Richards L S, L’t       1st Vt Art
  Ronnels J R, L’t        145th Pa Vol
  Rieneckar G, L’t        5th Pa Cav
  Rahn O, L’t             184th Pa Vol
  Ritter H, Cap           52d N Y Vol
  Reynolds W J, Cap       75th O Vol
  Reynolds E P, L’t       5th Tenn Cav
  Robbinson J F, L’t      67th Pa Vol
  Ruff J, L’t              “   “   “
  Randolph J F, Cap       123d O Vol
  Robbins A, Cap           “   “  “
  Rosenbaum O H, Cap       “   “  “
  Rossman W C, Cap        3d O Vol
  Russel M, Cap           51st Ind Vol
  Randall W, L’t          80th Ill Vol
  Richley J A, Cap        73d Ind Vol
  Roach A C, L’t          51st Ind Vol
  Rosencranz A C, Cap     4th Ind Cav
  Rowley G A, L’t         2d U S Inf
  Reid J A, L’t           2d N C Vol
  Robinson B E, L’t       95th O Vol
  Ryder S B, Cap          5th N Y Cav
  Robinson W A, Cap       77th Pa Vol
  Roach W E, L’t          49th N Y Vol
  Rogers A, Cap           4th Ky Cav
  Raymond H W, L’t        8th N Y Art
  Ross C W, L’t           1st Ky Vol
  Rose J E, L’t           120th Ill Vol
  Roberts E R, L’t        7th Ill Vol
  Reed J H, L’t           120th Ill Vol
  Richard J M, L’t        1st W Va Vol
  Rings G, Adjt           100th O Vol
  Rothe H, L’t            15th N Y Art
  Robb W J, Cap           1st W Va Vol
  Ramsey E K, L’t         1st N J Vol
  Riley L H, L’t          7th Pa R V Cps
  Ruby S V, L’t            “   “    “
  Ross C H, Adjt          13th Ind Vol
  Risedon I, L’t          11th Tenn Vol
  Robs E W, L’t           1st Tenn Vol
  Ring A, L’t             12th O Vol
  Richardson J A, L’t     2d N Y Cav
  Romaine L, L’t          2d N J Vol
  Roberts G, L’t          7th N H Vol
  Ross G, L’t             7th Vt Vol
  Rathbone T W, L’t       153d O Vol
  Rugg C L, L’t           6th Ind Cav
  Roger J R, L’t          157th Pa Vol
  Reed ——, Cap            107th N Y Vol
  Roney J C, L’t          3d O Vol
  Robinson T B, Cap       16th Conn Vol
  Richards J S, L’t
  Russell J A, Cap        93d Ill Vol
  Rice J S, L’t           13th Ind Vol
  Reade J, L’t            57th Mass Vol
  Richards R C, Cap       45th Pa Vol
  Raynor A J, L’t         19th U S Cav
  Rainear L, L’t          2d N J Cav
  Reynolds W J, Cap       4th R I Vol
  Robeson J S, L’t        7th Tenn Cav
  Riley W S, L’t          21st N Y Cav
  Randall W H, L’t        1st Mich S S
  Reir Geo W, Cap         107th N Y Vol
  Robinson C, Cap         31st U S Cav
  Rorick D, A D C         31st Iowa Vol
  Reynolds B J, Cap       143d N Y Vol
  Sturgeon W B, L’t       107th Pa Vol
  Stover M H, L’t         184th “   “
  Sweetland A A, L’t      2d Pa Cav
  Snyder J, Cap           14th N Y Vol
  Smith E B, L’t          1st Vt Art
  Stoughton H R, L’t Col  2d U S S S
  Steele J, Majo          2d Pa Cav
  Smart G F C, Cap        145th Pa Vol
  Schurr C, L’t           7th N Y Art
  Shafer W H, L’t         5th Pa Cav
  Standeford S A, L’t     42d N Y Vol
  Smith H I, Cap          53d Pa Vol
  Sargeant M G, L’t       1st Vt Art
  Schooley D, Cap         2d Pa “
  Stallman C H, L’t       87th Pa Vol
  Socks J, L’t            5th Md Art
  Sweadner J, L’t          “  “   “
  Stewart T H, L’t         “  “   “
  Stroman C P, L’t        87th Pa Art
  Sibley H L, L’t         116th O  “
  Smith M H, L’t          123d  “  “
  Schuyler J F, L’t         “   “  “
  Simpson G W, L’t        67th Pa  “
  Schroeder E, L’t        5th Md   “
  Smith J, L’t            67th Pa  “
  Schortz D, Cap          12th Pa Cav
  Sheppard E A, Cap       110th O Vol
  Smith C J, Major        6th Ind Cav
  Sanders A H, L’t Col    16th Iowa Vol
  Shedd W, Col            30th Ill Vol
  Strang H W, Cap           “   “   “
  Smith J H, Cap          16th Iowa Vol
  Skilton A S, Cap        57th O Vol
  Shuttz W, Cap           37th O Vol
  Smythe S S, L’t         1st Ill Art
  Smith A B, Cap          48th Ill Vol
  Scott Geo, L’t          10th Ind Vol
  Swift E, L’t            74th Ill Vol
  Sutherland G W, Adjt    126th O Vol
  Starkweather W L, Cap   85th N Y Vol
  Shaefer James, Cap      101st Pa Vol
  Strong E E, L’t         16th Conn Vol
  Sampson I B, Cap        2d Mass H Art
  Sinclair R B, L’t        “   “  “  “
  Spence D M, L’t         103d Pa Vol
  Stoke G W, L’t            “  “   “
  Smullen F, Cap            “  “   “
  Stewart A, Jr, Cap
  Sweeny J, Ass Egr       U S N
  Starr G H, Cap          104th N Y Vol
  Schell G L, Cap         88th Pa Vol
  Seely H B, Adjt         86th N Y Vol
  Schroeders E, L’t       74th Pa Vol
  Sears D C, L’t          94th N Y Vol
  Smith J A, L’t          154th N Y Vol
  Schuld G, L’t           45th N Y Vol
  Sampson J B, L’t        12th Mass Vol
  Spring W, Cap           45th N Y Vol
  Schroeder C H, L’t      12th Ill Vol
  Stevens C G, L’t        154th Ill Vol
  Swift R R, Cap          12th Mass Vol
  Skinner J L, L’t          “   “    “
  Stone D, Cap            118th N Y Vol
  Spindler J, L’t         73d Ill Vol
  Spencer S A, Cap        82d Ind Vol
  Spafford A C, L’t       41st O Vol
  Schwade J C, Cap        77th Pa Vol
  Singer G P, Cap         33d O Vol
  Spaulding E G, L’t      22d Mich Vol
  Smythe W H, L’t         16th U S Inf
  Schummerhone J, Cap     42d Ind Vol
  Schwainforth F, L’t     24th Ill Vol
  Sanger A W, L’t         21st Ill Vol
  Spencer F, L’t          17th O Vol
  Simpson J D, L’t        10th Ind Vol
  Stover J C, Cap         3d Tenn Vol
  Stevens J H, L’t        5th Me Vol
  Stevens F, L’t          190th Pa Vol
  Stuart C, L’t           24th N Y Vol
  Shanan M, L’t           140th N Y Vol
  Stevens J R, Cap        40th N Y Vol
  Speece L B, Major       7th Pa R V C
  Shelton W H, L’t        1st N Y Art
  Smith M S, L’t          16th Me Vol
  Snowwhite E, L’t        7th Pa R V C
  Swann E J, Cap          76th N Y Vol
  Sweet W H S, L’t        146th N Y Vol
  Schofield E, Cap        11th Pa R V C
  Steel J M, L’t          1st W Va Vol
  Sitler J R, L’t         2d Pa Cav
  Shaw J C, L’t           7th O Vol
  Sheerd D G, L’t         5th Ky Cav
  Shannon A L, L’t        3d Ind Cav
  Smith C B, L’t          4th N Y Cav
  Smith A M, L’t          1st Tenn Cav
  Sutter C, L’t           39th N Y Vol
  Spaulding E J, L’t      2d U S Cav
  Shaffer H C, L’t        2d N Y Cav
  Swayzie W A, Cap        3d O Vol
  Sharp E, L’t            51st Tnd Vol
  Smith D D, Cap          1st Tenn Vol
  Segar T W, L’t          81st Ill Vol
  Smith J C, L’t          24th Ind Bat
  Saber G E, L’t          2d R I Cav
  Sullivan J, Adjt        7th R I Vol
  Smith J B, L’t          5th W Ya Cav
  Sandon W, L’t           1st Wis Cav
  Sutcher C B, Cap        16th Ill Vol
  Sharp G A, L’t          19th Pa Cav
  Stone L L, R Q M        2d Vt Vol
  Smith L S, L’t          14th N Y Cav
  Sanford O L, Major      7th Conn Vol
  Smith J P, L’t          49th Pa Vol
  Stevens J G, L’t        52d Pa Vol
  Smith T A, Major        7th Tenn Cav
  Swope C T, L’t          4th Ky Vol
  Stewart A S, L’t        4th Ky Vol
  Strickland E P, L’t     114th Ill Vol
  Smith P, L’t            4th Tenn Cav
  Stanton J W, L’t        5th Ind Cav
  Soper M H, Major        5th Ind Cav
  St John W H, L’t        5th Ind Cav
  Shepard E, L’t          6th O Cav
  Scripture F E, R Q M    7th N Y Art
  Simmons A B, L’t        5th Ind Cav
  Starr H P, L’t          22d N Y Cav
  Spring B, L’t           75th O Vol
  Shurtz E, Cap           8th Iowa Cav
  Stover A C, L’t         95th O Vol
  Stansbury M L, Cap      95th O Vol
  Schofield R, Cap        1st Vt Cav
  Stone C P, L’t          1st Vt Cav
  Scudder A A, R Q M      35th Pa Vol
  Scoville H C, L’t       92d Ill Vol
  Stebbins J, L’t         77th N Y Vol
  Schwartz C S, L’t       2d N J Cav
  Sailor J, L’t           13th Pa Vol
  Smyser H C, L’t         2d Md Vol
  Scott R F, L’t          11th Ky Cav
  String T B, Cap         11th Ky Cav
  Stewart R R, L’t        2d N Y Cav
  Stribling M W, L’t      61st O Vol
  Shoemaker F M, Cap      100th O Vol
  Smith J, L’t            5th Pa Cav
  Stout J O, L’t          McL’s S O Cav
  Shepstrong M N, Cap     60th O Vol
  Snodgrass J G, Cap      110th O Vol
  Sargent H R, Cap        32d Me   “
  Stanton J W, L’t        5th Ind Cav
  Sheehan J P, L’t        31st Me Vol
  Shull J F, L’t          28th U S C T
  Smith S B. L’t          30th   “  “
  Stauber B F, L’t        20th Pa Cav
  Schulter H, L’t         43d N Y Vol
  Sherman S U, Cap        4th R I  “
  Seely L D, L’t          45th Pa  “
  Stewart R T, Cap        138th Pa Vol
  Stevens Frank, L’t      12th Pa Y R Cps
  Scott D W, Cap          23d U S Cav
  Schroeder H, L’t        82d Ill Vol
  Septon A F, L’t         8th Iowa Cav
  Senter A P, Cap         2d E Tenn Cav
  Scofield T D, L’t       27th Mich Vol
  Sanders C B, L’t        30th U S Cav
  Simondson P A, L’t      23d U S Cav
  Shaefer N W, L’t        24th Ind Cav
  Tuthill P A, L’t        104th N Y Vol
  Templeton O F, Cap      107th Pa Vol
  Thonsen B E, L’t        9th O Vol
  Teter A J, L’t          2d O Vol
  Teneyck S, Cap          18th U S Inf
  Tainter H S, L’t        82d N Y Vol
  Tanner D, L’t           118th Ill Vol
  Tompkins H V, L’t       59th N Y Vol
  Trent B W, L’t          106th Pa Vol
  Tyler L D C, Cap          “     “
  Thomas D, Major         135th O Vol
  Thornbury J M, S’t      39th Ky Vol
  Thompson C H, Major     5th Ind Cav
  Tillottson H H, L’t     73d Ind Vol
  Thomas A V, L’t          “     “
  Thompson J S, L’t       10th Vt Vol
  Thorp T J, L’t Col      1st N Y Drag
  Terwilliger J E, L’t    85th N Y Vol
  Turner M C, Cap         16th Conn Vol
  Tyler L E, L’t          1st Conn Cav
  Timpson S C, Cap        95th N Y Vol
  Thayer H O, L’t         67th Pa Vol
  Taylor A A, L’t         122d O Vol
  Thompson R, L’t         67th Pa Vol
  Tilbrand H, Cap         4th N H Vol
  Thorn R P, L’t          5th Ky Vol
  Tinn A, L’t             16th Iowa Vol
  Turner J H, Cap           “      “
  Todd O, L’t             18th Wis Vol
  Tiffany A W, L’t        9th Minn Vol
  Taylor H, L’t           55th Ind Vol
  Temple H, L’t           2d N Y Cav
  True W M, L’t           16th Ill Cav
  Thompson J J T, As Sur  12th O Vol
  Tibbles H G, Cap          “     “
  Taylor J, L’t           2d Pa V R Cps
  Tubbs A,
  Tower D W, L’t          17th Iowa Vol
  Towson F, L’t             “        “
  Tipton A F, L’t         8th Iowa Cav
  Tourtillotte J, Cap     7th Conn Vol
  Turner D, L’t           118th Ill Vol
  Tobel C, L’t            15th N Y Art
  Thompson J, Cap         4th O Cav
  Toby J P F, L’t         31st Me Vol
  Tinker S H, L’t         93d Ind Vol
  Unthank C L, Cap        11th Ky Cav
  Ullenbaugh G, L’t       1st O Vol
  Urwiler S C, Cap        67th Pa Vol
  Ulem J, L’t             3d O Vol
  Uptigrove J R, L’t      73d Ind Vol
  Underdown J D, Cap      2d Tenn Vol
  Ulffar H A, A A G
  Underwood J W, Cap      57th O Vol
  Von Keiser A, Cap       30th N Y Bat
  Van Netter R N, L’t     1st Mich Cav
  Von Valack D D, L’t     12th U S Inf
  Vanderheiff J W, Cap    45th N Y Vol
  Velfort G, L’t          54th N Y Vol
  Vickers D, Major        4th N J Vol
  Von Rottenburg H N, L’t 103 N Y Vol
  Von Helmrich G, L’t Col 44th Mo Cav
  Vinay F, L’t            85th N Y Vol
  Van Doren D, L’t        72d O Vol
  Van Ness G A, L’t       73d Ind Vol
  Van Rensalaer C, L’t    148th N Y Vol
  Vaughn Z, Cap           1st Me Cav
  Van Buren G M, Cap      6th N Y Cav
  Van Alin W C, L’t       45th Pa Vol
  Von Bulow A, L’t        3d N J Cav
  Von Haack A, Cap        68th N Y Vol
  West O W, L’t           1st N Y Drag
  Warner J B, L’t         8th Mich Cav
  Williams G, L’t          “     “
  Whitney M G, Cap        29th Mo Vol
  Winters J, L’t          72d O Vol
  Warner J, L’t           33d N J Vol
  Wheeler J F, L’t        149th N Y Vol
  West J H, Cap           11th Ky Vol
  Waidmann F, L’t         16th Iowa Vol
  Walker J, L’t           8th Tenn Vol
  Western C S, L’t        21st Wis Vol
  Willets W, L’t          22d Mich Vol
  Wands H P, Cap           “     “
  Welker W H, L’t         21st O Vol
  Welshimer P, Cap        21st Ill Vol
  Weatherby J, L’t        51st O Vol
  Weesner T A, L’t        14 & 15 Ill V Bat
  Wyman E F, C S
  West D J, L’t           6th Conn Vol
  Ware E W, L’t           9th Me Vol
  White Dan, Col          31st Me Vol
  Washburne W, Cap        35th Mass Vol
  Wing G H, L’t           14th N Y Art
  Wilder G O, Adj         15th Mass Vol
  Willis A R, Cap         8th Me Vol
  Wilcox C W, L’t         9th N H Vol
  Westbrook U S, Cap      135th O Vol
  Weeks E J, L’t          67th Pa Vol
  Woodard J E, L’t        18th Conn Vol
  Weakly T J, L’t         100th O Vol
  Wright B F, Cap         146th N Y Vol
  Wilson W M, Jr, Cap     122d O Vol
  Watson J C, L’t         126th O Vol
  Woodruff F M, L’t       76th N Y Vol
  Wright D L, L’t         51st Ind Vol
  Whiting J D, L’t        3d O Vol
  Wright W R, Cap         80th Ill Vol
  Wilson A, Cap            “     “
  Wolbach A R, L’t        3d O Vol
  Woodrow J C, L’t        73d Ind Vol
  Williamson J B, L’t     14th W Va Vol
  Weaver J R, L’t         18th Pa Cav
  Wilson H, L’t            “     “
  Worthen T A, L’t        118th Ill Vol
  Wakefield H B, Can      55th Ind Vol
  Whitman W S, L’t        66th Ind Vol
  Wiltshire J W, L’t      45th O Vol
  Weddle Geo, L’t         144th O Vol
  Woodrow C W, L’t        19th Iowa Vol
  Webb G W, Cap           2d Pa Art
  White A B, L’t          4th Pa Cav
  Warwick Jos F, L’t      101st Pa Vol
  Willis H H, L’t         40th N Y Vol
  Winship J, L’t          88th Ill Vol
  Whitney J N, L’t        2d R I Cav
  Wilson R, L’t           113th Ill Vol
  Whitten B F, L’t        9th Me Vol
  Whiteside J C, Cap      94th N Y Vol
  Warren J W, L’t         1st Wis Cav
  Wanzer G G, Major       24th N Y Cav
  Wadsworth M C, L’t      16th Me Vol
  Warchaw F, L’t          54th N Y Vol
  Wilson W C, Cap         104th N Y Vol
  White H G, Cap          94th N Y Vol
  Widdess C C, Cap        150th Pa Vol
  Whiston D, L’t          13th Mass Vol
  Welsh W H H, L’t        87th Pa Vol
  White C W, Cap          5th W Va Cav
  Wilson J, Cap           57th O Vol
  Williams W H, Cap       41st N Y Vol
  Watson W L, L’t         21st Wis Vol
  Winner C N, L’t         1st O Vol
  Wasson J M, L’t         40th O Vol
  Webb G W, Cap           2d Pa Art
  Williams R, Cap         12th O Vol
  Welch J C, L’t          85th N Y Vol
  Wheeler J D, Cap        15th Conn Vol
  Wenrick J E,            19th Pa Cav
  Williams W, L’t         8th Mich Cav
  Willis W, L’t           51st Ind Vol
  Williams M F, L’t       15th Ky Vol
  Wiley M, Cap            1st Tenn Vol
  Whittaker E B, Cap      72d Pa Vol
  Wallace J, L’t Col      47th O Vol
  Ward T H, L’t           59th U S Cav
  Wheaton J, L’t           “     “
  Wright R J, Cap         6th O Vol
  Wilcox W H H, L’t       10th N Y Cav
  Wallace R P, L’t        120th O Vol
  Walpole H H, Cap        122d N Y Vol
  Wright J W, L’t         10th Iowa Vol
  Whittemore B W, L’t     5th N Y Vol
  Wallace J J, L’t        7th Tenn Cav
  Wentworth H A, L’t      14th N Y H Art
  Wall M W, Cap           69th N Y Vol
  Walker W H, L’t         4th O Vol
  Wislon E S, L’t         1st Mass Cav
  Warren D H, Ass Surg    8th Iowa Cav
  Wilson R P, L’t         5th U S Cav
  Willets W, L’t          22d Mich Vol
  White H, Major
  While G M, Cap          1st W Va Vol
  Whitney J de W,         O Vet Inf
  Yaw E C, L’t            67th N Y Vol
  York J H, L’t           63d Ind Vol
  Youtz H C, Cap          126th O Vol
  Young D G, Cap          81st Ill Vol
  Young W J, L’t          111th Ill Vol
  York E D, L’t           2d N C U Vol
  Young J W, Major        76th NY Vol
  Yates C H, L’t          96th Ill Vol
  Young A, L’t            4th Pa Cav
  Young T P, L’t          4th Ky Cav
  Zarracher F K, Cap      18th Pa Cav
  Zeigler Aaron, L’t      7th Pa V R C
  Zeis H, Cap             80th Id Vol
  Zimm A, L’t             15th Iowa Vol
  Zobel C, L’t            15th N Y Art
  Zeigler J D, L’t        114th Ill Vol


DEATHS.

  Eckings T R, L’t        3d N J Vol
  Henderson J H, L’t      14th Ill Vet Batn
  Jackson R W, L’t        21st Wis Vol
  Spafford A C, L’t       41st O Vol
  Wenrick J E, Cap        19th Penn Cav
  Young A, L’t            4th Penn Cav


[Illustration: JAS. A. GARFIELD.]

  In the closing of this book, we deem it fitting to produce a very
  correct likeness of our beloved President, who lies at death’s
  door, smitten by the hand of the assassin Guiteau. This is done
  more in appreciation of the peculiar sadness of the circumstances
  and the anxiety of the people, than because of any connection which
  the cut may have with the other contents of the book.




46TH CONGRESS, 2D SESSION. H. R. 4495.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

FEBRUARY 16, 1880.

Read twice, referred to the Committee on Invalid Pensions, and
ordered to be printed.


Mr. Keifer, by unanimous consent, introduced the following bill:

  A BILL granting pensions to certain Union soldiers and sailors
  of the late war of the rebellion who were confined in so called
  Confederate prisons.

  Whereas during the late rebellion many soldiers and sailors of
  the Federal Army and Navy, through the fortunes of war, became
  prisoners and were confined in so called Confederate prisons, to
  the detriment and permanent injury of their health, but whose
  debility is of such a general and indefinable character as to
  exclude them from the benefits of existing pension laws: Therefore

_Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled_, That the Secretary
of the Interior be, and he hereby is, authorized and required to
place upon the pension-rolls of the United States, upon application
and proof being made to the satisfaction of the Department, all
honorably discharged soldiers and sailors of the Federal Army and
Navy who, during the late war, were captured and confined, during
the period of six months or more, in any of the prisons or places
commonly used for the confinement of prisoners by the so called
Confederate authorities during the late rebellion, and who are not
now beneficiaries, nor entitled to become so under existing pension
laws of the United States.

SEC. 2. That such pension shall in each case begin from the date of
the discharge of the soldier or sailor aforesaid from the military or
naval service of the United States, and shall be at the rate of eight
dollars per month in cases where the term of imprisonment shall have
been more than six months and less than one year, and one dollar per
month additional for each full month of such imprisonment in excess
of one year. And the said pension shall be paid at the same time
and in the same manner as other pensions are paid: _Provided_, That
nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize the reduction or
to prevent the increase of the pension of any person now receiving or
entitled to receive the benefits of existing pension laws.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Each line of the List of the Dead gives as much information about
  that soldier as was known. A missing item was left blank in the
  original book, but has been given a - or — mark in this etext.

  The format of each entry is as follows:

  Grave number from 1 to 12916.
      There are some gaps in the numbering and some duplicates; this
      book states a total of 12,912 deaths over the fourteen months.

  Name with initials or first name, or —— if none known.
      If he held a rank other than Private it is added after a comma.
      The most common abbreviations are Cor and S’t for Corporal and
      Sergeant, but others are used as well.

  Branch of the Army, if not Infantry.
      The most common are Cav for Cavalry, Art for Artillery, Bat for
      Battery, Mar for Marine Corps, Cit for Citizen.

  Cemetery number at Andersonville.
      Nearly 200 separate numbered burial areas were used.

  Assigned Company within Andersonville.
      Thirteen groups or Companies, A through M.

  Recorded date of burial.
      Month and day. The year 1864 is assumed, unless 65 is added
      after the date. The following entries will be assumed 65 as
      well, until a 64 is given, indicating a reversion to 1864.
      The original book also placed a 64 (sometimes 65) at the
      first entry on a book page, and these have not been removed.

  The first few pages covering Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware and
  District of Columbia, had the ‘Cemetery’ before the ‘Branch’ field
  when that was present; also a few in Illinois; for example ‘1 Cav’
  and ‘2 Art’. These have been reversed to ‘Cav 1’ and ‘Art 2’ to be
  consistent with the rest of the List.

  In most pages of the later States (Massachusetts to Pennsylvania)
  the rank was missing; this has been added (Cor or S’t), when
  present in the Library of Congress (LoC) source document.

  In some cases the service branch has been changed to a shorter
  abbreviation of 3-5 characters to maintain the table format. For
  example ‘Tenn St Gd’ or similar has been changed to ‘StG’;
  ‘St Militia’ or similar has been changed to ‘Mil’; ‘Mar Corps’ or
  similar has been changed to ‘Mar’; ‘Sig Corps’ or similar has been
  changed to ‘Sig’.

  A few names had different spelling in this List versus the LoC
  document. In general the List spelling has been retained unless
  clearly a typo.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors in the diary
  and in the List have been corrected after careful comparison with
  other occurrences within the text and reference to the LoC
  document.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added,
  when a predominant preference was found in the original book.

  Except for those changes in the diary text noted below, all
  misspellings in the text, and inconsistent or archaic usage,
  have been retained.

  Pg 15: ‘not conformiug with’ replaced by ‘not conforming with’.
  Pg 17: ‘eat everythihg on’ replaced by ‘eat everything on’.
  Pg 21: ‘agrees with we’ replaced by ‘agrees with me’.
  Pg 22: ‘quantities. Rlchmond’ replaced by ‘quantities. Richmond’.
  Pg 27: ‘what he he is worth’ replaced by ‘what he is worth’.
  Pg 30: ‘They Holy Sabbath’ replaced by ‘The Holy Sabbath’.
  Pg 32: ‘friends Myres and’ replaced by ‘friends Myers and’.
  Pg 40: ‘into the croud’ replaced by ‘into the crowd’.
  Pg 45: ‘at comcealment’ replaced by ‘at concealment’.
  Pg 48: ‘quarters near is’ replaced by ‘quarters near us’.
  Pg 51: ‘stood i bravely’ replaced by ‘stood it bravely’.
  Pg 54: ‘men at the time’ replaced by ‘men all the time’.
  Pg 56: ‘slung shots’ replaced by ‘sling shots’.
  Pg 57: ‘stortly after being’ replaced by ‘shortly after being’.
  Pg 58: ‘and perhaps myelf’ replaced by ‘and perhaps myself’.
  Pg 64: ‘ard negotiating’ replaced by ‘and negotiating’.
  Pg 72: ‘the more peacable’ replaced by ‘the more peaceable’.
  Pg 73: ‘sick a e again’ replaced by ‘sick are again’.
  Pg 73: ‘Mang prefer to’ replaced by ‘Many prefer to’.
  Pg 75: ‘tolera- no longer’ replaced by ‘tolerated no longer’.
  Pg 80: ‘and perpaps a few’ replaced by ‘and perhaps a few’.
  Pg 83: ‘if neccessary using’ replaced by ‘if necessary using’.
  Pg 85: ‘business of     g’ replaced by ‘business of living’.
  Pg 86: ‘Statue has nothing’ replaced by ‘Stature has nothing’.
  Pg 87: ‘much nore to eat’ replaced by ‘much more to eat’.
  Pg 92: ‘Ang. 17.’ replaced by ‘Aug. 17.’.
  Pg 100: ‘Knaw onion’ replaced by ‘Gnaw onion’.
  Pg 105: ‘belive they would’ replaced by ‘believe they would’.
  Pg 108: ‘never endnred any’ replaced by ‘never endured any’.
  Pg 109: ‘WAR ELECTION DAY’ replaced by ‘WAR—ELECTION DAY’.
  Pg 110: ‘his portion is his’ replaced by ‘his portion in his’.
  Pg 110: ‘see one onother’ replaced by ‘see one another’.
  Pg 110: ‘little Bulluck who’ replaced by ‘little Bullock who’.
  Pg 111: ‘a good murse’ replaced by ‘a good nurse’.
  Pg 113: ‘and ver  often’ replaced by ‘and very often’.
  Pg 115: ‘occasions helped the’ replaced by ‘occasions I helped the’.
  Pg 122: ‘the heighth of’ replaced by ‘the height of’.
  Pg 124: ‘and shave eaten’ replaced by ‘and have eaten’.
  Pg 126: ‘a small pototoe’ replaced by ‘a small potatoe’.
  Pg 129: ‘given me comfidence’ replaced by ‘given me confidence’.
  Pg 132: ‘are alse entitled’ replaced by ‘are also entitled’.
  Pg 135: ‘a though “Dave” says’ replaced by ‘although “Dave” says’.
  Pg 136: ‘joined one anotder’ replaced by ‘joined one another’.
  Pg 137: ‘yon are Yankees’ replaced by ‘you are Yankees’.
  Pg 137: ‘ate and and talked’ replaced by ‘ate and talked’.
  Pg 141: ‘to Jocco’s hut’ replaced by ‘to Jocko’s hut’.
  Pg 142: ‘caught halping’ replaced by ‘caught helping’.
  Pg 142: ‘for his pictnre’ replaced by ‘for his picture’.
  Pg 143: ‘a chain b at’ replaced by ‘a chain boat’.
  Pg 144: ‘Wil stick to him’ replaced by ‘Will stick to him’.
  Pg 145: ‘not go as as quiet’ replaced by ‘not go as quiet’.
  Pg 146: ‘See kept talking’ replaced by ‘She kept talking’.
  Pg 148: ‘and he wovld have’ replaced by ‘and he would have’.
  Pg 149: ‘won’t get canght’ replaced by ‘won’t get caught’.
  Pg 150: ‘or black cloth’ replaced by ‘of black cloth’.
  Pg 152: ‘as near at we can’ replaced by ‘as near as we can’.
  Pg 154: ‘also some shouttng’ replaced by ‘also some shouting’.
  Pg 155: ‘and say tle’ replaced by ‘and say the’.
  Pg 155: ‘must heep watch’ replaced by ‘must keep watch’.
  Pg 156: ‘left them entirly’ replaced by ‘left them entirely’.
  Pg 156: ‘2d Divisiom’ replaced by ‘2d Division’.
  Pg 157: ‘the rebel cttizens’ replaced by ‘the rebel citizens’.
  Pg 160: ‘In may interest’ replaced by ‘It may interest’.
  Pg 161: ‘a delieate frame’ replaced by ‘a delicate frame’.
  Pg 170: ‘this time Skelly’ replaced by ‘this time Skelley’.
  Pg 172: ‘my descriipton of’ replaced by ‘my description of’.
  Pg 178: ‘to the brian’ replaced by ‘to the bran’.
  Pg 180: ‘from the balnket’ replaced by ‘from the blanket’.
  Pg 184: ‘the Eng-ligh navy’ replaced by ‘the English navy’.
  Pg 192: ‘cam grano salis’ replaced by ‘cum grano salis’.

